 Chapter
 
  Elizabeth passed the chief of the night in Elizabeth sister ’s room , and in the morning had the pleasure of being able to send a tolerable answer to the enquiries which Elizabeth very early received from Charles by a housemaid , and some time afterwards from the two elegant ladies who waited on Charles sisters . In spite of this amendment , however , Elizabeth requested to have a note sent to Longbourn , desiring Elizabeth mother to visit Jane , and form Elizabeth own judgment of Jane situation . a note was immediately dispatched , and a note contents as quickly complied with . Elizabeth mother , accompanied by Elizabeth mother two youngest girls , reached Netherfield soon after the family breakfast . 
 
  Had Elizabeth mother found Jane in any apparent danger , Elizabeth mother would have been very miserable ; but being satisfied on seeing Jane that Jane illness was not alarming , Elizabeth mother had no wish of Jane recovering immediately , as Jane restoration to health would probably remove Jane from Netherfield . Elizabeth mother would not listen , therefore , to Elizabeth sister ’s proposal of being carried home ; neither did the apothecary , who arrived about the same time , think Elizabeth sister ’s proposal of being carried home at all advisable . After sitting a little while with Jane , on Caroline ’s appearance and invitation , Elizabeth mother and three daughters all attended Caroline ’s into the breakfast parlour . Charles met Elizabeth mother and three daughters all with hopes that Elizabeth mother had not found Miss Bennet worse than Elizabeth mother expected . 
 
  “ Indeed Elizabeth mother have , Charles , ” was Elizabeth mother answer . “ Miss Bennet is a great deal too ill to be moved . Mr. Jones says we must not think of moving Miss Bennet . We must trespass a little longer on Charles kindness . ” 
 
  “ Removed ! ” cried Charles . “ moving must not be thought of . Charles sister , Elizabeth mother am sure , will not hear of moving . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth mother may depend upon it , Elizabeth mother , ” said Caroline ’s , with cold civility , “ that Miss Bennet shall receive every possible attention while Miss Bennet remains with Elizabeth mother and three daughters all . ” 
 
  Elizabeth mother was profuse in Elizabeth mother acknowledgments . 
 
  “ Elizabeth mother am sure , ” Elizabeth mother added , “ if it was not for such good friends Elizabeth mother do not know what would become of Miss Bennet , for Miss Bennet is very ill indeed , and suffers a vast deal , though with the greatest patience in the world , which is always the way with Miss Bennet , for Miss Bennet has , without exception , the sweetest temper Elizabeth mother ever met with . Elizabeth mother often tell Elizabeth mother other girls Elizabeth mother other girls are nothing to Miss Bennet . You have a sweet room here , Charles , and a charming prospect over that gravel walk . Elizabeth mother do not know a place in the country that is equal to Netherfield . Charles will not think of quitting Netherfield in a hurry , Elizabeth mother hope , though Charles have but a short lease . ” 
 
  “ Whatever Charles do is done in a hurry , ” replied Charles ; “ and therefore if Charles should resolve to quit Netherfield , Charles should probably be off in five minutes . At present , however , Charles consider Charles as quite fixed here . ” 
 
  “ consider is exactly what Elizabeth mother should have supposed of Charles , ” said Elizabeth . 
 
  “ Elizabeth mother begin to comprehend Elizabeth mother , do Elizabeth mother ? ” cried Charles , turning towards Elizabeth mother . 
 
  “ Oh ! yes — Elizabeth mother understand Elizabeth perfectly . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth mother wish Elizabeth mother might take this for a compliment ; but to be so easily seen through Elizabeth mother am afraid is pitiful . ” 
 
  “ That is as it happens . It does not necessarily follow that a deep , intricate character is more or less estimable than such a one as Elizabeth . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth , ” cried Elizabeth mother , “ remember where Elizabeth are , and do not run on in the wild manner that Elizabeth are suffered to do at home . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth mother did not know before , ” continued Charles immediately , “ that Elizabeth were a studier of character . It must be an amusing study . ” 
 
  “ Yes ; but intricate characters are the most amusing . intricate characters have at least that advantage . ” 
 
  “ The country , ” said Fitzwilliam , “ can in general supply but few subjects for such a study . In a country neighbourhood you move in a very confined and unvarying society . ” 
 
  “ But people people alter so much , that there is something new to be observed in people for ever . ” 
 
  “ Yes , indeed , ” cried Elizabeth mother , offended by Fitzwilliam manner of mentioning a country neighbourhood . “ Elizabeth mother assure Fitzwilliam there is quite as much of that going on in the country as in town . ” 
 
  Everybody was surprised ; and Fitzwilliam , after looking at Elizabeth mother for a moment , turned silently away . Elizabeth mother Elizabeth mother had gained a complete victory over Fitzwilliam , continued Elizabeth mother triumph . 
 
  “ Elizabeth mother can not see that London has any great advantage over the country , for Elizabeth mother part , except the shops and public places . The country is a vast deal pleasanter , is not the country , Charles ? ” 
 
  “ When Charles am in the country , ” Charles replied , “ Charles never wish to leave the country ; and when Elizabeth mother am in town it is pretty much the same . They have each They advantages , and Elizabeth mother can be equally happy in either . ” 
 
  “ Aye — that is because Elizabeth mother have the right disposition . But Fitzwilliam , ” looking at Fitzwilliam , “ seemed to think the country was nothing at all . ” 
 
  “ Indeed , Elizabeth mother , Elizabeth mother are mistaken , ” said Elizabeth , blushing for Elizabeth mother . “ Elizabeth mother quite mistook Fitzwilliam . Fitzwilliam only meant that there was not such a variety of people to be met with in the country as in town , which Elizabeth mother must acknowledge to be true . ” 
 
  “ Certainly , Elizabeth , nobody said there were ; but as to not meeting with many people in this neighbourhood , Elizabeth mother believe there are few neighbourhoods larger . Elizabeth mother know Elizabeth mother and three daughters all dine with four - and - twenty families . ” 
 
  Nothing but concern for Elizabeth could enable Charles to keep Charles countenance . Elizabeth was less delicate , and directed Elizabeth eye towards Fitzwilliam with a very expressive smile . Elizabeth , for the sake of saying something that might turn Elizabeth mother ’s thoughts , now asked Elizabeth mother if Charlotte Lucas had been at Longbourn since Charlotte Lucas coming away . 
 
  “ Yes , Charlotte Lucas called yesterday with Charlotte Lucas father . What an agreeable man Charlotte Lucas father is , Charles — is not Charlotte Lucas father ? so much the man of fashion ! So genteel and so easy ! Charlotte Lucas father has always something to say to everybody . That is Elizabeth mother idea of good breeding ; and those persons who fancy those persons who fancy very important and never open those persons who fancy mouths , quite mistake the matter . ” 
 
  “ Did Charlotte Lucas dine with Elizabeth mother ? ” 
 
  “ No , Charlotte Lucas would go home . Elizabeth mother fancy Charlotte Lucas was wanted about the mince - pies . For Elizabeth mother part , Charles , Elizabeth mother always keep servants that can do servants that can do own work ; Elizabeth mother daughters are brought up differently . But everybody is to judge for everybody , and the Lucases are a very good sort of girls , Elizabeth mother assure Charles . It is a pity the Lucases are not handsome ! Not that Elizabeth mother think Charlotte Lucas so very plain — but then Charlotte Lucas is Elizabeth mother and three daughters all particular friend . ” 
 
  “ Charlotte Lucas seems a very pleasant young woman , ” said Charles . 
 
  “ Oh ! dear , yes ; but Charles must own Charlotte Lucas is very plain . Charlotte Lucas Charlotte Lucas has often said so , and envied Elizabeth mother Jane ’s beauty . Elizabeth mother do not like to boast of Elizabeth mother own child , but to be sure , Jane — one does not often see anybody better looking . does is what everybody says . Elizabeth mother do not trust Elizabeth mother own partiality . When Jane was only fifteen , there was a gentleman at Elizabeth mother brother Gardiner ’s in town so much in love with Jane , that Elizabeth mother sister - in - law was sure a gentleman at Elizabeth mother brother Gardiner ’s in town so much in love with Jane would make Jane an offer before we came away . But , however , a gentleman at Elizabeth mother brother Gardiner ’s in town so much in love with Jane did not . Perhaps a gentleman at Elizabeth mother brother Gardiner ’s in town so much in love with Jane thought Jane too young . However , a gentleman at Elizabeth mother brother Gardiner ’s in town so much in love with Jane wrote some verses on Jane , and very pretty some verses were . ” 
 
  “ And so ended a gentleman at Elizabeth mother brother Gardiner ’s in town so much in love with Jane affection , ” said Elizabeth impatiently . “ There has been many a one , Elizabeth fancy , overcome in the same way . Elizabeth wonder who first discovered the efficacy of poetry in driving away love ! ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth mother have been used to consider poetry as the food of love , ” said Fitzwilliam . 
 
  “ Of a fine , stout , healthy love it may . Everything nourishes what is strong already . But if it be only a slight , thin sort of inclination , Elizabeth mother am convinced that one good sonnet will starve it entirely away . ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam only smiled ; and the general pause which ensued made Elizabeth tremble lest Elizabeth mother should be exposing Elizabeth mother again . Elizabeth longed to speak , but could think of nothing to say ; and after a short silence Elizabeth mother began repeating Elizabeth mother thanks to Charles for Charles kindness to Jane , with an apology for troubling Charles also with Elizabeth . Charles was unaffectedly civil in Charles answer , and forced Charles younger sister to be civil also , and say what the occasion required . Elizabeth performed Elizabeth part indeed without much graciousness , but Elizabeth mother was satisfied , and soon afterwards ordered Elizabeth mother carriage . Upon this signal , the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls put the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls forward . The two girls had been whispering to each other during the whole visit , and the result of whispering was , that the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls should tax Charles with having promised on Charles first coming into the country to give a ball at Netherfield . 
 
  the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls was a stout , well - grown girl of fifteen , with a fine complexion and good - humoured countenance ; a favourite with the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls mother , whose affection had brought the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls into public at an early age . the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls had high animal spirits , and a sort of natural self - consequence , which the attentions of the officers , to whom the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls uncle ’s good dinners and the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls own easy manners recommended the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls , had increased into assurance . the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls was very equal , therefore , to address Charles on the subject of the ball , and abruptly reminded Charles of Charles promise ; adding , that it would be the most shameful thing in the world if Charles did not keep Charles promise . Charles answer to this sudden attack was delightful to Elizabeth mother ear . 
 
  “ Charles am perfectly ready , Charles assure the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls , to keep Charles engagement ; and when Jane is recovered , the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls shall , if the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls please , name the very day of the ball . But the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls would not wish to be dancing while Jane is ill . the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls 
 
  the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls declared the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls satisfied . “ Oh ! yes — it would be much better to wait till Jane was well , and by that time most likely Captain Carter would be at Meryton again . And when the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls have given the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls ball , ” the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls added , “ the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls shall insist on their giving one also . the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls shall tell Colonel Forster it will be quite a shame if Colonel Forster does not . ” 
 
  the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls and Elizabeth mother two youngest girls then departed , and Elizabeth returned instantly to Jane , leaving Elizabeth own and Elizabeth relations ’ behaviour to the remarks of the two elegant ladies who waited on Charles sisters and Fitzwilliam ; the latter of whom , however , could not be prevailed on to join in Elizabeth own and Elizabeth relations ’ censure of Elizabeth , in spite of all Caroline ’s witticisms on fine eyes . 
 Chapter 
 
  The day passed much as the day before had done . Mrs. Hurst and Caroline had spent some hours of the morning with the invalid , who continued , though slowly , to mend ; and in the evening Elizabeth joined Mrs. Hurst and Caroline party in the drawing - room . The loo table , however , did not appear . Fitzwilliam was writing , and Caroline , seated near Fitzwilliam , was watching the progress of Fitzwilliam letter , and repeatedly calling off Fitzwilliam attention by messages to Elizabeth . Mrs. Hurst and Charles were at piquet , and Mrs. Hurst was observing Mrs. Hurst and Caroline game . Elizabeth Elizabeth took up some needlework , and was sufficiently amused in attending to what passed between Fitzwilliam and Fitzwilliam companion . The perpetual commendations of Elizabeth either on Fitzwilliam handwriting , or on the evenness of Fitzwilliam lines , or on the length of Fitzwilliam letter , with the perfect unconcern with which Elizabeth praises were received , formed a curious dialogue , and was exactly in unison with Elizabeth opinion of each . 
 
  “ How delighted Georgiana will be to receive such a letter ! ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam made no answer . 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam write uncommonly fast . ” 
 
  “ Miss Bennet are mistaken . Fitzwilliam write rather slowly . ” 
 
  “ How many letters Fitzwilliam must have occasion to write in the course of a year ! Letters of business , too ! How odious Miss Bennet should think Letters of business ! ” 
 
  “ It is fortunate , then , that Letters of business fall to Fitzwilliam lot instead of to Miss Bennet . ” 
 
  “ Pray tell Elizabeth that Fitzwilliam long to see Elizabeth . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam have already told Elizabeth so once , by Miss Bennet desire . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam am afraid Fitzwilliam do not like Fitzwilliam pen . Let Fitzwilliam mend Fitzwilliam pen for Fitzwilliam . Fitzwilliam mend pens remarkably well . ” 
 
  “ Thank Fitzwilliam — but Fitzwilliam always mend Fitzwilliam own . ” 
 
  “ How can Fitzwilliam contrive to write so even ? ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam was silent . 
 
  “ Tell Fitzwilliam sister Fitzwilliam am delighted to hear of Elizabeth improvement on the harp , and pray let Elizabeth know that Fitzwilliam am quite in raptures with Elizabeth beautiful little design for a table , and Fitzwilliam think Elizabeth beautiful little design for a table infinitely superior to Miss Grantley ’s . ” 
 
  “ Will Fitzwilliam give Fitzwilliam leave to defer Fitzwilliam raptures till Fitzwilliam write again ? At present Fitzwilliam have not room to do Fitzwilliam raptures justice . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! it is of no consequence . Fitzwilliam shall see Elizabeth in January . But do Fitzwilliam always write such charming long letters to Elizabeth , Fitzwilliam ? ” 
 
  “ such charming long letters are generally long ; but whether always charming , it is not for Fitzwilliam to determine . ” 
 
  “ It is a rule with Fitzwilliam , that a person who can write a long letter with ease , can not write ill . ” 
 
  “ That will not do for a compliment to Fitzwilliam , Caroline , ” cried Caroline brother , “ because Fitzwilliam does not write with ease . Fitzwilliam studies too much for words of four syllables . Do not Fitzwilliam , Fitzwilliam ? ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam style of writing is very different from Fitzwilliam . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! ” cried Caroline , “ Charles writes in the most careless way imaginable . Charles leaves out half Charles words , and blots the rest . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam ideas flow so rapidly that Fitzwilliam have not time to express Fitzwilliam ideas — by which means Fitzwilliam letters sometimes convey no ideas at all to Fitzwilliam correspondents . ” 
 
  “ Charles humility , Charles , ” said Elizabeth , “ must disarm reproof . ” 
 
  “ Nothing is more deceitful , ” said Fitzwilliam , “ than the appearance of humility . the appearance of humility is often only carelessness of opinion , and sometimes an indirect boast . ” 
 
  “ And which of the two do Fitzwilliam call Fitzwilliam little recent piece of modesty ? ” 
 
  “ an indirect boast ; for Fitzwilliam are really proud of Fitzwilliam defects in writing , because Fitzwilliam consider Fitzwilliam defects in writing as proceeding from a rapidity of thought and carelessness of execution , which , if not estimable , Fitzwilliam think at least highly interesting . The power of doing anything with quickness is always much prized by the possessor , and often without any attention to the imperfection of the performance . When Fitzwilliam told Mother this morning that if Fitzwilliam ever resolved on quitting Netherfield Fitzwilliam should be gone in five minutes , Fitzwilliam meant told to be a sort of panegyric , of compliment to Fitzwilliam — and yet what is there so very laudable in a precipitance which must leave very necessary business undone , and can be of no real advantage to Fitzwilliam or any one else ? ” 
 
  “ Nay , ” cried Charles , “ this is too much , to remember at night all the foolish things that were said in the morning . And yet , upon Charles honour , Charles believed what Charles said of Charles to be true , and Charles believe it at this moment . At least , therefore , Charles did not assume the character of needless precipitance merely to show off before the ladies . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam dare say Fitzwilliam believed it ; but Fitzwilliam am by no means convinced that Fitzwilliam would be gone with such celerity . Fitzwilliam conduct would be quite as dependent on chance as that of any man Fitzwilliam know ; and if , as Fitzwilliam were mounting Fitzwilliam horse , a friend were to say , ‘ Fitzwilliam , Fitzwilliam had better stay till next week , ’ Fitzwilliam would probably do it , Fitzwilliam would probably not go — and , at another word , might stay a month . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam have only proved by this , ” cried Elizabeth , “ that Charles did not do justice to Charles own disposition . Fitzwilliam have shown Charles off now much more than Charles did Charles . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam am exceedingly gratified , ” said Charles , “ by Elizabeth converting what a friend says into a compliment on the sweetness of Fitzwilliam temper . But Fitzwilliam am afraid Elizabeth are giving it a turn which a friend did by no means intend ; for a friend would certainly think the better of Fitzwilliam , if under such a circumstance Fitzwilliam were to give a flat denial , and ride off as fast as Fitzwilliam could . ” 
 
  “ Would Fitzwilliam then consider the rashness of Fitzwilliam original intention as atoned for by Fitzwilliam obstinacy in adhering to Fitzwilliam original intention ? ” 
 
  “ Upon Miss Bennet word , Miss Bennet can not exactly explain the matter , Fitzwilliam must speak for Fitzwilliam . ” 
 
  “ Miss Bennet expect Fitzwilliam to account for opinions which Miss Bennet choose to call Fitzwilliam , but which Fitzwilliam have never acknowledged . Allowing the case , however , to stand according to Miss Bennet representation , Miss Bennet must remember , Miss Bennet , that Charles Charles return to the house , and the delay of Charles plan , has merely desired Charles return to the house , asked Charles return to the house without offering one argument in favour of Charles return to the house propriety . ” 
 
  “ To yield readily — easily — to the persuasion of a friend is no merit with Fitzwilliam . ” 
 
  “ To yield without conviction is no compliment to the understanding of either . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam appear to Miss Bennet , Fitzwilliam , to allow nothing for the influence of friendship and affection . A regard for the requester would often make one readily yield to a request , without waiting for arguments to reason one into a request . Miss Bennet am not particularly speaking of such a case as Fitzwilliam have supposed about Charles . We may as well wait , perhaps , till the circumstance occurs , before we discuss the discretion of Charles behaviour thereupon . But in general and ordinary cases between friend and friend , where one of them is desired by the other to change a resolution of no very great moment , should Fitzwilliam think ill of one of them for complying with the desire , without waiting to be argued into the desire ? ” 
 
  “ Will it not be advisable , before we proceed on this subject , to arrange with rather more precision the degree of importance which is to appertain to this request , as well as the degree of intimacy subsisting between the parties ? ” 
 
  “ By all means , ” cried Charles ; “ let us hear all the particulars , not forgetting the parties comparative height and size ; for that will have more weight in the argument , Miss Bennet , than Miss Bennet may be aware of . Charles assure Miss Bennet that if Fitzwilliam were not such a great tall fellow , in comparison with Charles , Charles should not pay Fitzwilliam half so much deference . Charles declare Charles do not know a more awful object than Fitzwilliam , on particular occasions , and in particular places ; at Fitzwilliam own house especially , and of a Sunday evening , when Fitzwilliam has nothing to do . ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam smiled ; but Elizabeth thought Elizabeth could perceive that Fitzwilliam was rather offended , and therefore checked Elizabeth laugh . Caroline warmly resented the indignity Caroline had received , in an expostulation with Caroline brother for talking such nonsense . 
 
  “ I see Charles design , Charles , ” said Caroline friend . “ Charles dislike an argument , and want to silence an argument . ” 
 
  “ Perhaps Charles do . Arguments are too much like disputes . If Fitzwilliam and Elizabeth will defer Fitzwilliam till Charles am out of the room , Charles shall be very thankful ; and then Mrs. Hurst and Caroline may say whatever Mrs. Hurst and Caroline like of Charles . ” 
 
  “ What Fitzwilliam ask , ” said Elizabeth , “ is no sacrifice on Elizabeth side ; and Fitzwilliam had much better finish Fitzwilliam letter . ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam took Elizabeth advice , and did finish Fitzwilliam letter . 
 
  When that business was over , Fitzwilliam applied to Mrs. Hurst and Caroline for the indulgence of some music . Caroline moved with alacrity to the pianoforte , and after a polite request that Elizabeth would lead the way , which Elizabeth as politely and more earnestly negatived , Caroline seated Caroline . 
 
  Mrs. Hurst sang with Mrs. Hurst sister , and while they were thus employed , Elizabeth could not help observing , as Elizabeth turned over some music - books that lay on the harp , how frequently Fitzwilliam ’s eyes were fixed on Elizabeth . Elizabeth hardly knew how to suppose that Elizabeth could be an object of admiration to so great a man ; and yet that Fitzwilliam should look at Elizabeth because Fitzwilliam disliked Elizabeth , was still more strange . Elizabeth could only imagine , however , at last , that Elizabeth drew Fitzwilliam notice because there was a something about Elizabeth more wrong and reprehensible , according to Fitzwilliam ideas of right , than in any other person present . The supposition did not pain Elizabeth . Elizabeth liked Fitzwilliam too little to care for Fitzwilliam approbation . 
 
  After playing some Italian songs , Caroline varied the charm by a lively Scotch air ; and soon afterwards Fitzwilliam , drawing near Elizabeth , said to Elizabeth — 
 
  “ Do not Elizabeth feel a great inclination , Elizabeth , to seize such an opportunity of dancing a reel ? ” 
 
  Elizabeth smiled , but made no answer . Fitzwilliam repeated the question , with some surprise at Elizabeth silence . 
 
  “ Oh ! ” said Elizabeth , “ Elizabeth heard Fitzwilliam before ; but Elizabeth could not immediately determine what to say in reply . Fitzwilliam wanted Elizabeth , Elizabeth know , to say ‘ Yes , ’ that Fitzwilliam might have the pleasure of despising Elizabeth taste ; but Fitzwilliam always delight in overthrowing those kind of schemes , and cheating a person of a person premeditated contempt . Elizabeth have , therefore , made up Elizabeth mind to tell Fitzwilliam , that Elizabeth do not want to dance a reel at all — and now despise Elizabeth if Fitzwilliam dare . ” 
 
  “ Indeed Fitzwilliam do not dare . ” 
 
  Elizabeth , having rather expected to affront Fitzwilliam , was amazed at Fitzwilliam gallantry ; but there was a mixture of sweetness and archness in Elizabeth manner which made it difficult for Elizabeth to affront anybody ; and Fitzwilliam had never been so bewitched by any woman as Fitzwilliam was by Elizabeth . Fitzwilliam really believed , that were it not for the inferiority of Elizabeth connections , Fitzwilliam should be in some danger . 
 
  Caroline saw , or suspected enough to be jealous ; and Caroline great anxiety for the recovery of Caroline dear friend Jane received some assistance from Caroline desire of getting rid of Elizabeth . 
 
  Caroline often tried to provoke Fitzwilliam into disliking Caroline guest , by talking of their supposed marriage , and planning Fitzwilliam happiness in such an alliance . 
 
  “ Caroline hope , ” said Caroline , as their were walking together in the shrubbery the next day , “ Fitzwilliam will give Fitzwilliam mother - in - law a few hints , when this desirable event takes place , as to the advantage of holding Mother tongue ; and if Fitzwilliam can compass it , do cure the younger girls of running after the officers . And , if Fitzwilliam may mention so delicate a subject , endeavour to check that little something , bordering on conceit and impertinence , which Fitzwilliam lady possesses . ” 
 
  “ Have Fitzwilliam anything else to propose for Fitzwilliam domestic felicity ? ” 
 
  “ Oh ! yes . Do let the portraits of Fitzwilliam uncle and aunt Philips be placed in the gallery at Pemberley . Put the portraits of Fitzwilliam uncle and aunt Philips next to Fitzwilliam great uncle the judge . Fitzwilliam uncle and aunt Philips are in the same profession , Fitzwilliam know , only in different lines . As for Fitzwilliam Elizabeth ’s picture , Fitzwilliam must not attempt to have Fitzwilliam Elizabeth ’s picture taken , for what painter could do justice to those beautiful eyes ? ” 
 
  “ It would not be easy , indeed , to catch their expression , but their colour and shape , and the eyelashes , so remarkably fine , might be copied . ” 
 
  At that moment their were met from another walk by Mrs. Hurst and Caroline . 
 
  “ Caroline did not know that Mrs. Hurst and Caroline intended to walk , ” said Caroline , in some confusion , lest their had been overheard . 
 
  “ Elizabeth used Mrs. Hurst abominably ill , ” answered Mrs. Hurst , “ running away without telling Mrs. Hurst that Elizabeth were coming out . ” 
 
  Then taking the disengaged arm of Fitzwilliam , Mrs. Hurst left Elizabeth to walk by Elizabeth . The path just admitted three . Fitzwilliam felt three rudeness , and immediately said , — 
 
  “ The path is not wide enough for three . three had better go into the avenue . ” 
 
  But Elizabeth , who had not the least inclination to remain with three , laughingly answered , 
 
  “ No , no ; stay where three are . three are charmingly grouped , and appear to uncommon advantage . The picturesque would be spoilt by admitting a fourth . Good - bye . ” 
 
  Elizabeth then ran gaily off , rejoicing as Elizabeth rambled about , in the hope of being at home again in a day or two . Jane was already so much recovered as to intend leaving Jane room for a couple of hours that evening . 
 Chapter 
 
  When the ladies removed after dinner , Elizabeth ran up to Elizabeth sister , and seeing Elizabeth sister well guarded from cold , attended Elizabeth sister into the drawing - room , where Elizabeth was welcomed by Elizabeth two friends with many professions of pleasure ; and Elizabeth had never seen them so agreeable as them were during the hour which passed before the gentlemen appeared . them powers of conversation were considerable . them could describe an entertainment with accuracy , relate an anecdote with humour , and laugh at them acquaintance with spirit . 
 
  But when the gentlemen entered , Jane was no longer the first object ; Caroline ’s eyes were instantly turned toward Fitzwilliam , and Caroline ’s had something to say to Fitzwilliam before Fitzwilliam had advanced many steps . Fitzwilliam addressed Fitzwilliam to Miss Bennet , with a polite congratulation ; Mr. Hurst also made Miss Bennet a slight bow , and said Mr. Hurst was “ very glad ; ” but diffuseness and warmth remained for Charles ’s salutation . Charles ’s was full of joy and attention . The first half - hour was spent in piling up the fire , lest Elizabeth sister should suffer from the change of room ; and Elizabeth sister removed at Charles ’s desire to the other side of the fireplace , that Elizabeth sister might be further from the door . Charles ’s then sat down by Elizabeth sister , and talked scarcely to anyone else . Elizabeth , at work in the opposite corner , saw it all with great delight . 
 
  When tea was over , Mr. Hurst reminded Mr. Hurst sister - in - law of the card - table — but in vain . Caroline ’s had obtained private intelligence that Fitzwilliam did not wish for cards ; and Mr. Hurst soon found even Mr. Hurst open petition rejected . Caroline ’s assured Mr. Hurst that no one intended to play , and the silence of the whole party on the subject seemed to justify Caroline ’s . Mr. Hurst had therefore nothing to do , but to stretch Mr. Hurst on one of the sofas and go to sleep . Fitzwilliam took up a book ; Caroline ’s did the same ; and Mrs. Hurst , principally occupied in playing with Caroline ’s bracelets and rings , joined now and then in Mr. Hurst conversation with Miss Bennet . 
 
  Caroline ’s attention was quite as much engaged in watching Fitzwilliam ’s progress through a book , as in reading Caroline ’s own ; and Caroline ’s was perpetually either making some enquiry , or looking at Fitzwilliam page . Caroline ’s could not win Fitzwilliam , however , to any conversation ; Fitzwilliam merely answered Caroline ’s question , and read on . At length , quite exhausted by the attempt to be amused with Caroline ’s own book , which Caroline ’s had only chosen because a book was the second volume of Fitzwilliam , Caroline ’s gave a great yawn and said , “ How pleasant it is to spend an evening in this way ! Caroline ’s declare after all there is no enjoyment like reading ! How much sooner one tires of anything than of a book ! When Caroline ’s have a house of Caroline ’s own , Caroline ’s shall be miserable if Caroline ’s have not an excellent library . ” 
 
  No one made any reply . Caroline ’s then yawned again , threw aside Caroline ’s book , and cast Caroline ’s eyes round the room in quest for some amusement ; when hearing Caroline ’s brother mentioning a ball to Miss Bennet Miss Bennet , Caroline ’s turned suddenly towards Caroline ’s brother and said : 
 
  “ By the bye , Caroline ’s brother , are Caroline ’s brother really serious in meditating a dance at Netherfield ? Caroline ’s would advise Caroline ’s brother , before Caroline ’s brother determine on it , to consult the wishes of the present party ; Caroline ’s am much mistaken if there are not some among us to whom a ball would be rather a punishment than a pleasure . ” 
 
  “ If Caroline ’s mean Fitzwilliam , ” cried Caroline ’s brother , “ Fitzwilliam may go to bed , if Fitzwilliam chooses , before a ball to Miss Bennet Miss Bennet begins — but as for a ball to Miss Bennet Miss Bennet , it is quite a settled thing ; and as soon as Nicholls has made white soup enough , Caroline ’s brother shall send round Caroline ’s brother cards . ” 
 
  “ Caroline ’s should like balls infinitely better , ” Caroline ’s replied , “ if balls were carried on in a different manner ; but there is something insufferably tedious in the usual process of such a meeting . It would surely be much more rational if conversation instead of dancing were made the order of the day . ” 
 
  “ Much more rational , Caroline ’s brother dear Caroline , Caroline ’s brother dare say , but conversation would not be near so much like a ball . ” 
 
  Caroline ’s made no answer , and soon afterwards Caroline ’s got up and walked about the room . Caroline ’s figure was elegant , and Caroline ’s walked well ; but Fitzwilliam , at whom it was all aimed , was still inflexibly studious . In the desperation of Caroline ’s feelings , Caroline ’s resolved on one effort more , and , turning to Elizabeth , said : 
 
  “ Elizabeth , let Caroline ’s persuade Elizabeth to follow Caroline ’s example , and take a turn about the room . Caroline ’s assure Elizabeth it is very refreshing after sitting so long in one attitude . ” 
 
  Elizabeth was surprised , but agreed to take immediately . Caroline ’s succeeded no less in the real object of Elizabeth civility ; Fitzwilliam looked up . Fitzwilliam was as much awake to the novelty of attention in that quarter as Elizabeth Elizabeth could be , and unconsciously closed a book . Fitzwilliam was directly invited to join the whole party , but Fitzwilliam declined invited , observing that Fitzwilliam could imagine but two motives for their choosing to walk up and down the room together , with either of which motives Fitzwilliam joining their would interfere . “ What could Fitzwilliam mean ? Caroline ’s was dying to know what could be Fitzwilliam meaning?”—and asked Elizabeth whether Elizabeth could at all understand Fitzwilliam ? 
 
  “ Not at all , ” was Elizabeth answer ; “ but depend upon it , Fitzwilliam means to be severe on their , and their surest way of disappointing Fitzwilliam will be to ask nothing about it . ” 
 
  Caroline ’s , however , was incapable of disappointing Fitzwilliam in anything , and persevered therefore in requiring an explanation of Fitzwilliam two motives . 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam have not the smallest objection to explaining but two motives for their choosing to walk up and down the room together , ” said Fitzwilliam , as soon as Elizabeth allowed Fitzwilliam to speak . “ their either choose this method of passing the evening because their are in each other ’s confidence , and have secret affairs to discuss , or because their are conscious that their figures appear to the greatest advantage in walking ; if the first , Fitzwilliam would be completely in their way , and if the second , Fitzwilliam can admire their much better as Fitzwilliam sit by the fire . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! shocking ! ” cried Caroline ’s . “ Caroline ’s never heard anything so abominable . How shall their punish Fitzwilliam for such a speech ? ” 
 
  “ Nothing so easy , if Fitzwilliam have but the inclination , ” said Elizabeth . “ We can all plague and punish one another . Tease Fitzwilliam — laugh at Fitzwilliam . Intimate as Fitzwilliam are , Fitzwilliam must know how it is to be done . ” 
 
  “ But upon Caroline ’s honour , Caroline ’s do not . Caroline ’s do assure Fitzwilliam that Caroline ’s intimacy has not yet taught Caroline ’s that . Tease calmness of manner and presence of mind ! No , no ; Caroline ’s feel Fitzwilliam may defy their there . And as to laughter , their will not expose their , if Fitzwilliam please , by attempting to laugh without a subject . Fitzwilliam may hug Fitzwilliam . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam is not to be laughed at ! ” cried Elizabeth . “ That is an uncommon advantage , and uncommon Elizabeth hope it will continue , for it would be a great loss to Elizabeth to have many such acquaintances . Elizabeth dearly love a laugh . ” 
 
  “ Caroline ’s , ” said Fitzwilliam , “ has given Fitzwilliam more credit than can be . The wisest and the best of men — nay , the wisest and best of men actions — may be rendered ridiculous by a person whose first object in life is a joke . ” 
 
  “ Certainly , ” replied Elizabeth—“there are such people , but Elizabeth hope Elizabeth am not one of such people . Elizabeth hope Elizabeth never ridicule what is wise and good . Follies and nonsense , whims and inconsistencies , do divert Elizabeth , Elizabeth own , and Elizabeth laugh at Follies and nonsense , whims and inconsistencies whenever Elizabeth can . But Follies and nonsense , whims and inconsistencies , Caroline ’s suppose , are precisely what Fitzwilliam are without . ” 
 
  “ Perhaps that is not possible for anyone . But it has been the study of Elizabeth life to avoid those weaknesses which often expose a strong understanding to ridicule . ” 
 
  “ Such as vanity and pride . ” 
 
  “ Yes , vanity is a weakness indeed . But pride — where there is a real superiority of mind , pride will be always under good regulation . ” 
 
  Elizabeth turned away to hide a smile . 
 
  “ Caroline ’s examination of Fitzwilliam is over , Caroline ’s presume , ” said Caroline ’s ; “ and pray what is the result ? ” 
 
  “ Caroline ’s am perfectly convinced by the result that Fitzwilliam has no defect . Fitzwilliam owns it Fitzwilliam without disguise . ” 
 
  “ No , ” said Fitzwilliam , “ Fitzwilliam have made no such pretension . Fitzwilliam have faults enough , but faults are not , Fitzwilliam hope , of understanding . Fitzwilliam temper Fitzwilliam dare not vouch for . Fitzwilliam temper is , Fitzwilliam believe , too little yielding — certainly too little for the convenience of the world . Fitzwilliam can not forget the follies and vices of others so soon as Fitzwilliam ought , nor others offenses against Fitzwilliam . Fitzwilliam feelings are not puffed about with every attempt to move Fitzwilliam feelings . Fitzwilliam temper would perhaps be called resentful . Fitzwilliam good opinion once lost , is lost forever . ” 
 
  “ That is a failing indeed ! ” cried Elizabeth . “ Implacable resentment is a shade in a character . But Fitzwilliam have chosen Fitzwilliam fault well . Caroline ’s really can not laugh at Fitzwilliam fault . Fitzwilliam are safe from Caroline ’s . ” 
 
  “ There is , Fitzwilliam believe , in every disposition a tendency to some particular evil — a natural defect , which not even the best education can overcome . ” 
 
  “ And Fitzwilliam defect is to hate everybody . ” 
 
  “ And Fitzwilliam , ” Fitzwilliam replied with a smile , “ is willfully to misunderstand them . ” 
 
  “ Do let their have a little music , ” cried Caroline ’s , tired of a conversation in which Caroline ’s had no share . “ Louisa , Louisa will not mind Caroline ’s waking Mr. Hurst ? ” 
 
  Louisa had not the smallest objection , and the pianoforte was opened ; and Fitzwilliam , after a few moments ’ recollection , was not sorry for it . Fitzwilliam began to feel the danger of paying Elizabeth too much attention . 
 Chapter
 
  In consequence of an agreement between the sisters , Elizabeth wrote the next morning to the sisters mother , to beg that the carriage might be sent for the sisters in the course of the day . But the sisters mother the sisters mother daughters remaining at Netherfield till the following Tuesday , which would exactly finish Jane ’s week , could not bring the sisters mother to receive the sisters with pleasure before . the sisters mother answer , therefore , was not propitious , at least not to Elizabeth ’s wishes , for Elizabeth was impatient to get home . the sisters mother sent the sisters word that the sisters could not possibly have the carriage before the following Tuesday , which would exactly finish Jane ’s week ; and in the sisters mother postscript it was added , that if Charles and Charles sister pressed the sisters to stay longer , the sisters mother could spare the sisters very well . Against staying longer , however , Elizabeth was positively resolved — nor did Elizabeth much expect it would be asked ; and fearful , on the contrary , as being considered as intruding the sisters needlessly long , Elizabeth urged Jane ’s to borrow the carriage immediately , and at length it was settled that the sisters original design of leaving Netherfield that morning should be mentioned , and borrow made . 
 
  The communication excited many professions of concern ; and enough was said of wishing the sisters to stay at least till the following day to work on Jane ’s ; and till the morrow the sisters going was deferred . Caroline was then sorry that Caroline had proposed the delay , for Caroline jealousy and dislike of one sister much exceeded Caroline affection for the other . 
 
  The master of the house heard with real sorrow that the sisters were to go so soon , and repeatedly tried to persuade Jane ’s that it would not be safe for Jane ’s — that Jane ’s was not enough recovered ; but Jane ’s was firm where Jane ’s felt Jane ’s to be right . 
 
  To Fitzwilliam it was welcome intelligence — Elizabeth had been at Netherfield long enough . Elizabeth attracted Fitzwilliam more than Fitzwilliam liked — and Caroline was uncivil to Elizabeth , and more teasing than usual to Caroline . Caroline wisely resolved to be particularly careful that no sign of admiration should now escape Caroline , nothing that could elevate Elizabeth with the hope of influencing Caroline felicity ; sensible that if such an idea had been suggested , Caroline behaviour during the last day must have material weight in confirming or crushing such an idea . Steady to Caroline purpose , Caroline scarcely spoke ten words to Elizabeth through the whole of Saturday , and though the sisters were at one time left by the sisters for half - an - hour , Caroline adhered most conscientiously to Caroline book , and would not even look at Elizabeth . 
 
  On Sunday , after morning service , the separation , so agreeable to almost all , took place . Caroline ’s civility to Elizabeth increased at last very rapidly , as well as Elizabeth affection for Jane ’s ; and when the sisters parted , after assuring Elizabeth of the pleasure it would always give Elizabeth to see Elizabeth either at Longbourn or Netherfield , and embracing Elizabeth most tenderly , Elizabeth even shook hands with Jane ’s . Elizabeth took leave of the whole party in the liveliest of spirits . 
 
  the sisters were not welcomed home very cordially by the sisters mother . the sisters mother wondered at the sisters coming , and thought the sisters very wrong to give so much trouble , and was sure Jane ’s would have caught cold again . But the sisters father , though very laconic in the sisters father expressions of pleasure , was really glad to see the sisters ; the sisters father had felt the sisters importance in the family circle . The evening conversation , when they were all assembled , had lost much of The evening conversation , when they were all assembled animation , and almost all The evening conversation , when they were all assembled sense by the absence of Jane ’s and Elizabeth . 
 
  They found Mary , as usual , deep in the study of thorough - bass and human nature ; and had some extracts to admire , and some new observations of threadbare morality to listen to . Catherine and Lydia had information for they of a different sort . Much had been done and much had been said in the regiment since the preceding Wednesday ; several of the officers had dined lately with several of the officers uncle , a private had been flogged , and it had actually been hinted that Colonel Forster was going to be married . 
 Chapter 
 
  “ Father hope , Father dear , ” said Father to Father wife , as they were at breakfast the next morning , “ that Father dear have ordered a good dinner to - day , because Father have reason to expect an addition to our family party . ” 
 
  “ Who do Father mean , Father ? Father know of nobody that is coming , Father am sure , unless Charlotte Lucas should happen to call in — and Father hope Father dinners are good enough for Charlotte Lucas . Father do not believe Charlotte Lucas often sees such at home . ” 
 
  “ The person of whom Father speak is a gentleman , and a stranger . ” 
 
  Father dear eyes sparkled . “ a gentleman , and a stranger gentleman and a stranger ! It is Charles , Father am sure ! Well , Father dear am sure Father dear shall be extremely glad to see Charlotte Lucas . But — good Lord ! how unlucky ! There is not a bit of fish to be got to - day . Lydia , Father dear love , ring the bell — Father dear must speak to Father this moment . ” 
 
  “ It is not Charlotte Lucas , ” said Father dear husband ; “ it is The person of whom Father speak . ” 
 
  This roused a general astonishment ; and Father had the pleasure of being eagerly questioned by Father dear and Father five daughters at once . 
 
  After amusing Father some time with Father dear and Father five daughters curiosity , Father thus explained : 
 
  “ About a month ago Father received this letter ; and about a fortnight ago Father answered this letter , for Father thought it a case of some delicacy , and requiring early attention . this letter is from Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as pleases . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! Father , ” cried Father wife , “ Father dear can not bear to hear Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as mentioned . Pray do not talk of Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as . Father dear do think it is the hardest thing in the world , that Father dear estate should be entailed away from Father dear own children ; and Father dear am sure , if Father dear had been Father dear , Father dear should have tried long ago to do something or other about it . ” 
 
  Jane and Elizabeth tried to explain to Father dear the nature of an entail . Jane and Elizabeth had often attempted to do an entail before , but an entail was a subject on which Father dear was beyond the reach of reason , and Father dear continued to rail bitterly against the cruelty of settling Father dear estate away from Father five daughters , in favour of a man whom nobody cared anything about . 
 
  “ It certainly is a most iniquitous affair , ” said Father , “ and nothing can clear Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as from the guilt of inheriting Longbourn . But if Father dear will listen to Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as letter , Father dear may perhaps be a little softened by Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as manner of expressing Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as . ” 
 
  “ No , that Father dear am sure Father dear shall not ; and Father dear think it is very impertinent of Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as to write to Father dear at all , and very hypocritical . Father dear hate such false friends . Why could Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as not keep on quarreling with Father dear , as Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as father did before Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as ? ” 
 
  “ Why , indeed ; Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as does seem to have had some filial scruples on that head , as Father dear will hear . ” 
 
  “ Hunsford , near Westerham , Kent , 15th October . 
 
  “ Father , — 
  “ The disagreement subsisting between Father dear and my late honoured father always gave my much uneasiness , and since my have had the misfortune to lose my late honoured father , my have frequently wished to heal the breach ; but for some time my was kept back by my own doubts , fearing lest it might seem disrespectful to my late honoured father memory for my to be on good terms with anyone with whom it had always pleased my late honoured father to be at variance.—‘There , Father dear . ’—My mind , however , is now made up on the subject , for having received ordination at Easter , my have been so fortunate as to be distinguished by the patronage of the Right Honourable Cathleen , widow of Sir Lewis de Bourgh , whose bounty and beneficence has preferred my to the valuable rectory of this parish , where it shall be my earnest endeavour to demean myself with grateful respect towards her ladyship , and be ever ready to perform those rites and ceremonies which are instituted by the Church of England . As a clergyman , moreover , my feel it my duty to promote and establish the blessing of peace in all families within the reach of my influence ; and on these grounds my flatter myself that my present overtures are highly commendable , and that the circumstance of my being next in the entail of Longbourn estate will be kindly overlooked on Father dear side , and not lead Father dear to reject the offered olive - branch . my can not be otherwise than concerned at being the means of injuring Father dear amiable daughters , and beg leave to apologise for being , as well as to assure Father dear of my readiness to make Father dear amiable daughters every possible amends — but of this hereafter . If Father dear should have no objection to receive my into Father dear house , my propose myself the satisfaction of waiting on Father dear and Father five daughters , Monday , November 18th , by four o’clock , and shall probably trespass on Father dear hospitality till the Saturday se’ennight following , which my can do without any inconvenience , as her ladyship is far from objecting to my occasional absence on a Sunday , provided that some other clergyman is engaged to do the duty of the day.—I remain , Father dear , with respectful compliments to Father dear lady and daughters , Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as ” 
 
  “ At four o’clock , therefore , Father dear and Father five daughters may expect Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as , ” said Father , as Father folded up this letter . “ Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as seems to be a most conscientious and polite young man , upon Father word , and Father doubt Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as will prove a valuable acquaintance , especially if her ladyship should be so indulgent as to let Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as come to us again . ” 
 
  “ There is some sense in what Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as says about Father dear amiable daughters , however , and if Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as is disposed to make Father dear amiable daughters any amends , Father shall not be the person to discourage Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as . ” 
 
  “ Though it is difficult , ” said Jane , “ to guess in what way Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as can mean to make Father dear amiable daughters the atonement Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as thinks Father dear amiable daughters due , the wish is certainly to Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as credit . ” 
 
  Elizabeth was chiefly struck by Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as extraordinary deference for her ladyship , and Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as kind intention of christening , marrying , and burying Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as parishioners whenever it were required . 
 
  “ Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as must be an oddity , Elizabeth think , ” said Elizabeth . “ Elizabeth can not make Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as out.—There is something very pompous in Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as style.—And what can Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as mean by apologising for being next in the entail?—We can not suppose Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as would help it if Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as could.—Could Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as be a sensible man , Father ? ” 
 
  “ No , Father dear , Father think not . Father have great hopes of finding Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as quite the reverse . There is a mixture of servility and self - importance in Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as letter , which promises well . Father am impatient to see Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as . ” 
 
  “ In point of composition , ” said Mary , “ this letter does not seem defective . The idea of the olive - branch perhaps is not wholly new , yet Father think The idea of the olive - branch is well expressed . ” 
 
  To Jane and Elizabeth , neither this letter nor this letter writer were in any degree interesting . It was next to impossible that Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as should come in a scarlet coat , and it was now some weeks since Jane and Elizabeth had received pleasure from the society of a man in any other colour . As for Father dear , Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as letter had done away much of Father dear ill - will , and Father dear was preparing to see Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as with a degree of composure which astonished Father dear husband and daughters . 
 
  Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as was punctual to Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as time , and was received with great politeness by the whole family . Father indeed said little ; but Father five daughters were ready enough to talk , and Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as seemed neither in need of encouragement , nor inclined to be silent Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as . Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as was a tall , heavy - looking young man of five - and - twenty . Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as air was grave and stately , and Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as manners were very formal . Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as had not been long seated before Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as complimented Father dear on having so fine a family of daughters ; said Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as had heard much of so fine a family of daughters beauty , but that in this instance fame had fallen short of the truth ; and added , that Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as did not doubt Father dear seeing so fine a family of daughters in due time disposed of in marriage . This gallantry was not much to the taste of some of Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as hearers ; but Father dear , answered most readily . 
 
  “ Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as are very kind , Father dear am sure ; and Father dear wish with all Father dear heart it may prove so , for else so fine a family of daughters will be destitute enough . Things are settled so oddly . ” 
 
  “ Father dear allude , perhaps , to the entail of Longbourn . ” 
 
  “ Ah ! Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as , Father dear do indeed . It is a grievous affair to Father dear poor girls , Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as must confess . Not that Father dear mean to find fault with Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as , for such things Father dear know are all chance in this world . There is no knowing how estates will go when once estates come to be entailed . ” 
 
  “ Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as am very sensible , Father dear , of the hardship to Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as fair cousins , and could say much on the subject , but that Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as am cautious of appearing forward and precipitate . But Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as can assure so fine a family of daughters that Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as come prepared to admire so fine a family of daughters . At present Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as will not say more ; but , perhaps , when we are better acquainted — ” 
 
  Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as was interrupted by a summons to dinner ; and so fine a family of daughters smiled on each other . so fine a family of daughters were not the only objects of Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as admiration . The hall , the dining - room , and all its furniture , were examined and praised ; and Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as commendation of everything would have touched Father dear heart , but for the mortifying supposition of Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as viewing everything as Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as own future property . The dinner too in The dinner too turn was highly admired ; and Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as begged to know to which of Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as fair cousins the excellency of The dinner too cooking was owing . But Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as was set right there by Mother , who assured Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as with some asperity that they were very well able to keep a good cook , and that Father five daughters had nothing to do in the kitchen . Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as begged pardon for having displeased Father dear . In a softened tone Father dear declared Father dear not at all offended ; but Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as continued to apologise for about a quarter of an hour . 
 Chapter 
 
  During dinner , Father scarcely spoke at all ; but when the servants were withdrawn , Father thought it time to have some conversation with Father guest , and therefore started a subject in which Father expected Father guest to shine , by observing that Father guest seemed very fortunate in Father guest patroness . Father guest patroness attention to Father guest wishes , and consideration for Father guest comfort , appeared very remarkable . Father could not have chosen better . Father guest was eloquent in Father guest praise . a subject in which Father expected Father guest to shine , by observing that Father guest seemed very fortunate in Father guest patroness elevated Father guest to more than usual solemnity of manner , and with a most important aspect Father guest protested that “ Father guest had never in Father guest life witnessed such behaviour in a person of rank — such affability and condescension , as Father guest had Father guest experienced from Father guest patroness . Father guest patroness had been graciously pleased to approve of both of the discourses which Father guest had already had the honour of preaching before Father guest patroness . Father guest patroness had also asked Father guest twice to dine at Rosings , and had sent for Father guest only the Saturday before , to make up Father guest patroness pool of quadrille in the evening . Father guest patroness was reckoned proud by many people Father guest knew , but Father guest had never seen anything but affability in Father guest patroness . Father guest patroness had always spoken to Father guest as Father guest patroness would to any other gentleman ; Father guest patroness made not the smallest objection to Father guest joining in the society of the neighbourhood nor to Father guest leaving the parish occasionally for a week or two , to visit Father guest relations . Father guest patroness had even condescended to advise Father guest to marry as soon as Father guest could , provided Father guest chose with discretion ; and had once paid Father guest a visit in Father guest humble parsonage , where Father guest patroness had perfectly approved all the alterations Father guest had been making , and had even vouchsafed to suggest some Father guest patroness — some shelves in the closet up stairs . ” 
 
  “ That is all very proper and civil , Mother am sure , ” said Mother , “ and Mother dare say Father guest patroness is a very agreeable woman . It is a pity that great ladies in general are not more like Father guest patroness . Does Father guest patroness live near Father guest , Father guest ? ” 
 
  “ The garden in which stands Father guest humble abode is separated only by a lane from Rosings Park , Father guest patroness residence . ” 
 
  “ Mother think Father guest said Father guest patroness was a widow , Father guest ? Has Father guest patroness any family ? ” 
 
  “ Father guest patroness has only one daughter , the heiress of Rosings , and of very extensive property . ” 
 
  “ Ah ! ” said Mother , shaking Mother head , “ then Father guest patroness is better off than many girls . And what sort of young lady is Father guest patroness ? Is Father guest patroness handsome ? ” 
 
  “ Father guest patroness is a most charming young lady indeed . Father guest patroness Father guest patroness says that , in point of true beauty , Father guest patroness is far superior to the handsomest of Father guest patroness sex , because there is that in Father guest patroness features which marks Father guest patroness . Father guest patroness is unfortunately of a sickly constitution , which has prevented Father guest patroness from making that progress in many accomplishments which Father guest patroness could not have otherwise failed of , as Father guest am informed by the lady who superintended Father guest patroness education , and who still resides with Father guest patroness education . But Father guest patroness is perfectly amiable , and often condescends to drive by Father guest humble abode in Father guest patroness little phaeton and ponies . ” 
 
  “ Has Father guest patroness been presented ? Mother do not remember Father guest patroness name among the ladies at court . ” 
 
  “ Father guest patroness indifferent state of health unhappily prevents Father guest patroness being in town ; and by prevents , as Father guest told Father guest patroness one day , has deprived the British court of the British court brightest ornament . Father guest patroness seemed pleased with the idea ; and Mother may imagine that Father guest am happy on every occasion to offer those little delicate compliments which are always acceptable to ladies . Father guest have more than once observed to Father guest patroness , that Father guest patroness charming daughter seemed born to be a duchess , and that the most elevated rank , instead of giving Father guest patroness consequence , would be adorned by Father guest patroness . These are the kind of little things which please Father guest patroness , and it is a sort of attention which Father guest conceive Father guest peculiarly bound to pay . ” 
 
  “ Father guest judge very properly , ” said Father , “ and it is happy for Father guest that Father guest possess the talent of flattering with delicacy . May Father ask whether these pleasing attentions proceed from the impulse of the moment , or are the result of previous study ? ” 
 
  “ these pleasing attentions arise chiefly from what is passing at the time , and though Father guest sometimes amuse Father guest with suggesting and arranging such little elegant compliments as may be adapted to ordinary occasions , Father guest always wish to give such little elegant compliments as may be adapted to ordinary occasions as unstudied an air as possible . ” 
 
  Father ’s expectations were fully answered . Father cousin was as absurd as Father had hoped , and Father listened to Father cousin with the keenest enjoyment , maintaining at the same time the most resolute composure of countenance , and , except in an occasional glance at Elizabeth , requiring no partner in Father pleasure . 
 
  By tea - time , however , the dose had been enough , and Father was glad to take Father guest into the drawing - room again , and , when tea was over , glad to invite Father guest to read aloud to the ladies . Father guest readily assented , and a book was produced ; but , on beholding a book ( for everything announced a book to be from a circulating library ) , Father guest started back , and begging pardon , protested that Father guest never read novels . Kitty stared at Father guest , and Lydia exclaimed . Other books were produced , and after some deliberation Father guest chose Fordyce ’s Sermons . Lydia gaped as Father guest opened a book , and before Father guest had , with very monotonous solemnity , read three pages , Lydia interrupted Father guest with : 
 
  “ Do Mother know , Mother , that Lydia uncle Phillips talks of turning away Richard ; and if Lydia uncle Phillips does , Colonel Forster will hire Richard . Lydia aunt told Father guest so Lydia aunt on Saturday . Lydia shall walk to Meryton to - morrow to hear more about it , and to ask when Mr. Denny comes back from town . ” 
 
  Lydia was bid by Lydia two eldest sisters to hold Lydia tongue ; but Father guest , much offended , laid aside a book , and said : 
 
  “ Father guest have often observed how little young ladies are interested by books of a serious stamp , though written solely for little young ladies benefit . interested amazes Father guest , Father guest confess ; for , certainly , there can be nothing so advantageous to little young ladies as instruction . But Father guest will no longer importune Father guest young cousin . ” 
 
  Then turning to Father , Father guest offered Father guest as Father antagonist at backgammon . Father accepted the challenge , observing that Father acted very wisely in leaving Lydia two eldest sisters to Lydia two eldest sisters own trifling amusements . Mother and Lydia two eldest sisters apologised most civilly for interrupted , and promised that interrupted should not occur again , if Father guest would resume Father guest book ; but Father guest , after assuring Mother and Lydia two eldest sisters that Father guest bore Father guest young cousin no ill - will , and should never resent Lydia behaviour as any affront , seated Father guest at another table with Father , and prepared for backgammon . 
 Chapter 
 
  William Collins was not a sensible man , and the deficiency of nature had been but little assisted by education or society ; the greatest part of William Collins life having been spent under the guidance of an illiterate and miserly father ; and though William Collins belonged to one of the universities , William Collins had merely kept the necessary terms , without forming at one of the universities any useful acquaintance . The subjection in which an illiterate and miserly father had brought William Collins up had given William Collins originally great humility of manner ; but great humility of manner was now a good deal counteracted by the self - conceit of a weak head , living in retirement , and the consequential feelings of early and unexpected prosperity . A fortunate chance had recommended William Collins to Cathleen when the living of Hunsford was vacant ; and the respect which William Collins felt for Cathleen high rank , and William Collins veneration for Cathleen as William Collins patroness , mingling with a very good opinion of William Collins , of William Collins authority as a clergyman , and William Collins right as a rector , made William Collins altogether a mixture of pride and obsequiousness , self - importance and humility . 
 
  Having now a good house and a very sufficient income , William Collins intended to marry ; and in seeking a reconciliation with the Longbourn family William Collins had a wife in view , as William Collins meant to choose one of the daughters , if William Collins found the daughters as handsome and amiable as the daughters were represented by common report . William Collins plan was William Collins plan of amends — of atonement — for inheriting the daughters father ’s estate ; and William Collins thought William Collins plan an excellent one , full of eligibility and suitableness , and excessively generous and disinterested on William Collins own part . 
 
  William Collins plan did not vary on seeing the daughters . Miss Bennet ’s lovely face confirmed William Collins views , and established all William Collins strictest notions of what was due to seniority ; and for the first evening Miss Bennet ’s was William Collins settled choice . The next morning , however , made an alteration ; for in a quarter of an hour ’s tête - à - tête with Mother before breakfast , a conversation beginning with William Collins parsonage - house , and leading naturally to the avowal of William Collins hopes , that a mistress might be found for it at Longbourn , produced from Mother , amid very complaisant smiles and general encouragement , a caution against the very Jane William Collins had fixed on . “ As to Mother younger daughters , Mother could not take upon Mother to say — Mother could not positively answer — but Mother did not know of any prepossession ; Mother eldest daughter , Mother must just mention — Mother felt it incumbent on Mother to hint , was likely to be very soon engaged . ” William Collins William Collins had only to change from the very Jane William Collins had fixed on to Elizabeth — and change was soon done — done while Mother was stirring the fire . Elizabeth , equally next to the very Jane William Collins had fixed on in birth and beauty , succeeded the very Jane William Collins had fixed on of course . Mother Mother treasured up the hint , and trusted that Mother might soon have two daughters married ; and the man whom Mother could not bear to speak of the day before was now high in Mother good graces . 
 
  Lydia ’s intention of walking to Meryton was not forgotten ; every sister except Mary agreed to go with Lydia ’s ; and William Collins was to attend the daughters , at the request of Father , who was most anxious to get rid of William Collins , and have Father , who was most anxious to get rid of William Collins , and have library to Father , who was most anxious to get rid of William Collins , and have ; for thither William Collins had followed Father , who was most anxious to get rid of William Collins , and have after breakfast ; and there William Collins would continue , nominally engaged with one of the largest folios in the collection , but really talking to Father , who was most anxious to get rid of William Collins , and have , with little cessation , of Father , who was most anxious to get rid of William Collins , and have house and garden at Hunsford . Such doings discomposed Father , who was most anxious to get rid of William Collins , and have exceedingly . In Father , who was most anxious to get rid of William Collins , and have library Father , who was most anxious to get rid of William Collins , and have had been always sure of leisure and tranquillity ; and though prepared , as Father , who was most anxious to get rid of William Collins , and have told Elizabeth , to meet with folly and conceit in every other room of the house , Father , who was most anxious to get rid of William Collins , and have was used to be free from folly and conceit there ; Father , who was most anxious to get rid of William Collins , and have civility , therefore , was most prompt in inviting William Collins to join Father , who was most anxious to get rid of William Collins , and have daughters in the daughters walk ; and William Collins , being in fact much better fitted for a walker than a reader , was extremely pleased to close one of the largest folios in the collection , and go . 
 
  In pompous nothings on William Collins side , and civil assents on that of William Collins cousins , the daughters time passed till the daughters entered Meryton . The attention of the younger ones was then no longer to be gained by William Collins . the younger ones eyes were immediately wandering up in the street in quest of the officers , and nothing less than a very smart bonnet indeed , or a really new muslin in a shop window , could recall the officers . 
 
  But the attention of every lady was soon caught by a young man , whom every lady had never seen before , of most gentlemanlike appearance , walking with another officer on the other side of the way . a young man , whom every lady had never seen before , of most gentlemanlike appearance , walking with another officer on the other side of the way was the very Mr. Denny concerning whose return from London Lydia ’s came to enquire , and a young man , whom every lady had never seen before , of most gentlemanlike appearance , walking with another officer on the other side of the way bowed as the daughters passed . All were struck with a young man , whom every lady had never seen before , of most gentlemanlike appearance , walking with another officer on the other side of the way air , all wondered who a young man , whom every lady had never seen before , of most gentlemanlike appearance , walking with another officer on the other side of the way could be ; and the daughters , determined if possible to find out , led the way across the street , under pretense of wanting something in an opposite shop , and fortunately had just gained the pavement when the officers , turning back , had reached the same spot . Mr. Denny addressed the daughters directly , and entreated permission to introduce Mr. Denny friend , Charlie , who had returned with Mr. Denny the day before from town , and Mr. Denny was happy to say had accepted a commission in the officers corps . This was exactly as it should be ; for a young man , whom every lady had never seen before , of most gentlemanlike appearance , walking with another officer on the other side of the way wanted only regimentals to make a young man , whom every lady had never seen before , of most gentlemanlike appearance , walking with another officer on the other side of the way completely charming . a young man , whom every lady had never seen before , of most gentlemanlike appearance , walking with another officer on the other side of the way appearance was greatly in a young man , whom every lady had never seen before , of most gentlemanlike appearance , walking with another officer on the other side of the way favour ; a young man , whom every lady had never seen before , of most gentlemanlike appearance , walking with another officer on the other side of the way had all the best part of beauty , a fine countenance , a good figure , and very pleasing address . introduce was followed up on a young man , whom every lady had never seen before , of most gentlemanlike appearance , walking with another officer on the other side of the way side by a happy readiness of conversation — a readiness at the same time perfectly correct and unassuming ; and the daughters were still standing and talking together very agreeably , when the sound of horses drew the daughters notice , and Fitzwilliam and Charles were seen riding down the street . On distinguishing the daughters the daughters , the officers came directly towards the daughters , and began the usual civilities . Charles was the principal spokesman , and Miss Bennet ’s the principal object . Charles was then , Charles said , on Charles way to Longbourn on purpose to enquire after Miss Bennet ’s . Fitzwilliam corroborated it with a bow , and was beginning to determine not to fix Fitzwilliam eyes on Elizabeth , when the daughters were suddenly arrested by the sight of a young man , whom every lady had never seen before , of most gentlemanlike appearance , walking with another officer on the other side of the way , and Elizabeth happening to see the countenance of both as both looked at each other , was all astonishment at the effect of the meeting . Both changed colour , one looked white , the other red . Charles , after a few moments , touched Charles hat — a salutation which Fitzwilliam just deigned to return . What could be the meaning of a salutation which Fitzwilliam just deigned to return ? It was impossible to imagine ; it was impossible not to long to know . 
 
  In another minute , Charles , but without seeming to have noticed what passed , took leave and rode on with Charles friend . 
 
  the officers walked with the daughters to the door of Mr. Phillip ’s house , and then made the officers bows , in spite of Lydia ’s pressing entreaties that the daughters should come in , and even in spite of Mr. Phillip ’s throwing up the parlour window and loudly seconding the invitation . 
 
  Mr. Phillip ’s was always glad to see the daughters ; and the two eldest , from the two eldest recent absence , were particularly welcome , and Mr. Phillip ’s was eagerly expressing Mr. Phillip ’s surprise at the two eldest sudden return home , which , as the two eldest own carriage had not fetched the two eldest , Mr. Phillip ’s should have known nothing about , if Mr. Phillip ’s had not happened to see Mr. Jones ’s shop - boy in the street , who had told Mr. Phillip ’s that they were not to send any more draughts to Netherfield because Miss Bennet ’s were come away , when Mr. Phillip ’s civility was claimed towards William Collins by the very Jane William Collins had fixed on introduction of William Collins . Mr. Phillip ’s received William Collins with Mr. Phillip ’s very best politeness , which William Collins returned with as much more , apologising for William Collins intrusion , without any previous acquaintance with Mr. Phillip ’s , which William Collins could not help flattering William Collins , however , might be justified by William Collins relationship to the young ladies who introduced William Collins to Mr. Phillip ’s notice . Mr. Phillip ’s was quite awed by such an excess of good breeding ; but Mr. Phillip ’s contemplation of one stranger was soon put to an end by exclamations and enquiries about the other ; of whom , however , Mr. Phillip ’s could only tell Mr. Phillip ’s nieces what the daughters already knew , that Mr. Denny had brought William Collins from London , and that William Collins was to have a lieutenant ’s commission in the — — shire . Mr. Phillip ’s had been watching William Collins the last hour , Mr. Phillip ’s said , as William Collins walked up and down the street , and had Charles appeared , the daughters would certainly have continued the occupation , but unluckily no one passed windows now except a few of the officers , who , in comparison with William Collins , were become “ stupid , disagreeable fellows . ” Some of the officers , who , in comparison with William Collins , were become “ stupid , disagreeable fellows were to dine with Mr. Phillip ’s the next day , and Mr. Phillip ’s promised to make Mr. Phillip ’s husband call on Charles , and give Charles an invitation also , if the family from Longbourn would come in the evening . come was agreed to , and Mr. Phillip ’s protested that the daughters would have a nice comfortable noisy game of lottery tickets , and a little bit of hot supper afterwards . The prospect of such delights was very cheering , and the daughters parted in mutual good spirits . William Collins repeated William Collins apologies in quitting the room , and was assured with unwearying civility that William Collins apologies were perfectly needless . 
 
  As the daughters walked home , Elizabeth related to the very Jane William Collins had fixed on what Elizabeth had seen pass between the officers ; but though the very Jane William Collins had fixed on would have defended either or both , had the officers appeared to be in the wrong , the very Jane William Collins had fixed on could no more explain such behaviour than the very Jane William Collins had fixed on sister . 
 
  William Collins on William Collins return highly gratified Mother by admiring Mr. Phillip ’s manners and politeness . William Collins protested that , except Cathleen and Mother eldest daughter , William Collins had never seen a more elegant woman ; for Mr. Phillip ’s had not only received William Collins with the utmost civility , but even pointedly included William Collins in Mr. Phillip ’s invitation for the next evening , although utterly unknown to Mr. Phillip ’s before . Something , William Collins supposed , might be attributed to William Collins connection with the Longbourn family , but yet William Collins had never met with so much attention in the whole course of William Collins life . 
 Chapter 
 
  As no objection was made to the young people ’s engagement with the young people ’s aunt , and all William Collins ’s scruples of leaving Father and Mother for a single evening during William Collins ’s visit were most steadily resisted , the coach conveyed William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s five cousins at a suitable hour to Meryton ; and William Collins ’s five cousins had the pleasure of hearing , as William Collins ’s five cousins entered the drawing - room , that Charlie had accepted the young people ’s aunt invitation , and was then in the house . 
 
  When this information was given , and William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s five cousins had all taken William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s five cousins seats , William Collins ’s was at leisure to look around William Collins ’s and admire , and William Collins ’s was so much struck with the size and furniture of the drawing - room , that William Collins ’s declared William Collins ’s might almost have supposed William Collins ’s in the small summer breakfast parlour at Rosings ; declared ; but when Mrs. Phillips understood from William Collins ’s what Rosings was , and who was Rosings proprietor — when Mrs. Phillips had listened to the description of only one of Cathleen ’s drawing - rooms , and found that the chimney - piece alone had cost eight hundred pounds , Mrs. Phillips felt all the force of the compliment , and would hardly have resented a comparison with the housekeeper ’s room . 
 
  In describing to Mrs. Phillips all the grandeur of Cathleen ’s and Cathleen ’s mansion , with occasional digressions in praise of William Collins ’s own humble abode , and the improvements William Collins ’s own humble abode was receiving , William Collins ’s was happily employed until the gentlemen joined William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s five cousins ; and William Collins ’s found in Mrs. Phillips a very attentive listener , whose opinion of William Collins ’s consequence increased with what Mrs. Phillips heard , and who was resolving to retail it all among Mrs. Phillips neighbours as soon as Mrs. Phillips could . To the girls , who could not listen to William Collins ’s five cousins cousin , and who had nothing to do but to wish for an instrument , and examine William Collins ’s five cousins own indifferent imitations of china on the mantelpiece , the interval of waiting appeared very long . the interval of waiting was over at last , however . The gentlemen did approach , and when Charlie walked into the room , Elizabeth felt that Elizabeth had neither been seeing Charlie before , nor thinking of Charlie since , with the smallest degree of unreasonable admiration . The officers of the — — shire were in general a very creditable , gentlemanlike set , and the best of The officers of the — — shire were of the present party ; but Charlie was as far beyond The officers of the — — shire in person , countenance , air , and walk , as The officers of the — — shire were superior to the broad - faced , stuffy uncle Phillips , breathing port wine , who followed The officers of the — — shire into the room . 
 
  Charlie was the happy man towards whom almost every female eye was turned , and Elizabeth was the happy woman by whom Charlie finally seated Charlie ; and the agreeable manner in which Charlie immediately fell into conversation , though it was only on its being a wet night , made Elizabeth feel that the commonest , dullest , most threadbare topic might be rendered interesting by the skill of the speaker . 
 
  With such rivals for the notice of the fair as Charlie and The officers of the — — shire , William Collins ’s seemed to sink into insignificance ; to the young ladies William Collins ’s certainly was nothing ; but William Collins ’s had still at intervals a kind listener in Mrs. Phillips , and was by Mrs. Phillips watchfulness , most abundantly supplied with coffee and muffin . When the card - tables were placed , William Collins ’s had the opportunity of obliging Mrs. Phillips in turn , by sitting down to whist . 
 
  “ William Collins ’s know little of whist at present , ” said William Collins ’s , “ but William Collins ’s shall be glad to improve William Collins ’s , for in William Collins ’s situation in life — ” Mrs. Phillips was very glad for William Collins ’s compliance , but could not wait for William Collins ’s reason . 
 
  Charlie did not play at whist , and with ready delight was Charlie received at the other table between Elizabeth and Lydia . At first there seemed danger of Lydia ’s engrossing Charlie entirely , for Lydia was a most determined talker ; but being likewise extremely fond of lottery tickets , Lydia soon grew too much interested in whist , too eager in making bets and exclaiming after prizes to have attention for anyone in particular . Allowing for the common demands of whist , Charlie was therefore at leisure to talk to Elizabeth , and Elizabeth was very willing to hear Charlie , though what Elizabeth chiefly wished to hear Elizabeth could not hope to be told — the history of Charlie acquaintance with Fitzwilliam . Elizabeth dared not even mention Fitzwilliam . Elizabeth curiosity , however , was unexpectedly relieved . Charlie began the subject Charlie . Charlie enquired how far Netherfield was from Meryton ; and , after receiving Elizabeth answer , asked in a hesitating manner how long Fitzwilliam had been staying there . 
 
  “ About a month , ” said Elizabeth ; and then , unwilling to let the subject drop , added , “ Fitzwilliam is a man of very large property in Derbyshire , Elizabeth understand . ” 
 
  “ Yes , ” replied Charlie ; “ Fitzwilliam estate there is a noble one . A clear ten thousand per annum . Elizabeth could not have met with a person more capable of giving Elizabeth certain information on that head than Charlie , for Charlie have been connected with Fitzwilliam family in a particular manner from Charlie infancy . ” Elizabeth Elizabeth could not but look surprised . 
 
  “ Elizabeth may well be surprised , Elizabeth , at such an assertion , after seeing , as Elizabeth probably might , the very cold manner of our meeting yesterday . Are Elizabeth much acquainted with Fitzwilliam ? ” 
 
  “ As much as Elizabeth ever wish to be , ” cried Elizabeth very warmly . “ Elizabeth have spent four days in the same house with Fitzwilliam , and Elizabeth think Fitzwilliam very disagreeable . ” 
 
  “ Charlie have no right to give Charlie opinion , ” said Charlie , “ as to Fitzwilliam being agreeable or otherwise . Charlie am not qualified to form one . Charlie have known Fitzwilliam too long and too well to be a fair judge . It is impossible for Charlie to be impartial . But Charlie believe Elizabeth opinion of Fitzwilliam would in general astonish — and perhaps Elizabeth would not express Elizabeth opinion of Fitzwilliam quite so strongly anywhere else . Here Elizabeth are in Elizabeth own family . ” 
 
  “ Upon Elizabeth word , Elizabeth say no more here than Elizabeth might say in any house in the neighbourhood , except Netherfield . Fitzwilliam is not at all liked in Hertfordshire . Everybody is disgusted with Fitzwilliam pride . You will not find Fitzwilliam more favourably spoken of by anyone . ” 
 
  “ Charlie can not pretend to be sorry , ” said Charlie , after a short interruption , “ that Fitzwilliam or that any man should not be estimated beyond any man deserts ; but with Fitzwilliam Charlie believe it does not often happen . The world is blinded by Fitzwilliam fortune and consequence , or frightened by Fitzwilliam high and imposing manners , and sees Fitzwilliam only as Fitzwilliam chooses to be seen . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth should take Fitzwilliam , even on Elizabeth slight acquaintance , to be an ill - tempered man . ” Charlie only shook Charlie head . 
 
  “ Charlie wonder , ” said Charlie , at the next opportunity of speaking , “ whether Fitzwilliam is likely to be in Hertfordshire much longer . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth do not at all know ; but Elizabeth heard nothing of Fitzwilliam going away when Elizabeth was at Netherfield . Elizabeth hope Elizabeth plans in favour of the — — shire will not be affected by Fitzwilliam being in the neighbourhood . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! no — it is not for Elizabeth to be driven away by Fitzwilliam . If Fitzwilliam wishes to avoid seeing Elizabeth , Fitzwilliam must go . We are not on friendly terms , and it always gives Elizabeth pain to meet Fitzwilliam , but Elizabeth have no reason for avoiding Fitzwilliam but what Elizabeth might proclaim before all the world , a sense of very great ill - usage , and most painful regrets at Fitzwilliam being what Fitzwilliam is . Fitzwilliam father , Miss Bennet , the late Fitzwilliam , was one of the best men that ever breathed , and the truest friend Elizabeth ever had ; and Elizabeth can never be in company with this Fitzwilliam without being grieved to the soul by a thousand tender recollections . Fitzwilliam behaviour to Elizabeth has been scandalous ; but Elizabeth verily believe Elizabeth could forgive Fitzwilliam anything and everything , rather than Fitzwilliam disappointing the hopes and disgracing the memory of Fitzwilliam father . ” 
 
  Elizabeth found the interest of the subject increase , and listened with all Elizabeth heart ; but the delicacy of it prevented further enquiry . Charlie Charlie began to speak on more general topics , Meryton , the neighbourhood , the society , appearing highly pleased with all that Charlie had yet seen , and speaking of the society with gentle but very intelligible gallantry . 
 
  “ It was the prospect of constant society , and good society , ” Charlie added , “ which was Charlie chief inducement to enter the — — shire . Charlie knew it to be a most respectable , agreeable corps , and Charlie friend Denny tempted Charlie further by Charlie friend Denny account of their present quarters , and the very great attentions and excellent acquaintances Meryton had procured their present quarters . Society , Charlie own , is necessary to Charlie . Charlie have been a disappointed man , and Charlie spirits will not bear solitude . Charlie must have employment and society . A military life is not what Charlie was intended for , but circumstances have now made A military life eligible . The church ought to have been Charlie profession — Charlie was brought up for the church , and Charlie should at this time have been in possession of a most valuable living , had a most valuable living pleased Fitzwilliam . ” 
 
  “ Indeed ! ” 
 
  “ Yes — the late Fitzwilliam bequeathed Charlie the next presentation of the best living in Fitzwilliam gift . Fitzwilliam was Charlie godfather , and excessively attached to Charlie . Charlie can not do justice to Fitzwilliam kindness . Fitzwilliam meant to provide for Charlie amply , and thought Fitzwilliam had done it ; but when the living fell , the living was given elsewhere . ” 
 
  “ Good heavens ! ” cried Elizabeth ; “ but how could that be ? How could Fitzwilliam will be disregarded ? Why did Elizabeth not seek legal redress ? ” 
 
  “ There was just such an informality in the terms of the bequest as to give Elizabeth no hope from law . A man of honour could not have doubted the intention , but Fitzwilliam chose to doubt the intention — or to treat the bequest as a merely conditional recommendation , and to assert that Elizabeth had forfeited all claim to the living by extravagance , imprudence — in short anything or nothing . Certain it is , that the living became vacant two years ago , exactly as Elizabeth was of an age to hold the living , and that the living was given to another man ; and no less certain is it , that Elizabeth can not accuse Elizabeth of having really done anything to deserve to lose the living . Elizabeth have a warm , unguarded temper , and Elizabeth may have spoken Elizabeth opinion of Fitzwilliam , and to Fitzwilliam , too freely . Elizabeth can recall nothing worse . But the fact is , that we are very different sort of men , and that Fitzwilliam hates Elizabeth . ” 
 
  “ This is quite shocking ! Fitzwilliam deserves to be publicly disgraced . ” 
 
  “ Some time or other Fitzwilliam will be — but it shall not be by Elizabeth . Till Elizabeth can forget Fitzwilliam father , Elizabeth can never defy or expose Fitzwilliam . ” Elizabeth Elizabeth honoured Elizabeth for such feelings , and thought Elizabeth handsomer than ever as Elizabeth expressed such feelings . 
 
  “ But what , ” said Elizabeth , after a pause , “ can have been Fitzwilliam motive ? What can have induced Fitzwilliam to behave so cruelly ? ” 
 
  “ A thorough , determined dislike of Charlie — a dislike which Elizabeth can not but attribute in some measure to jealousy . Had the late Fitzwilliam liked Charlie less , Fitzwilliam son might have borne with Charlie better ; but Fitzwilliam father , Miss Bennet , the late Fitzwilliam uncommon attachment to Charlie irritated Fitzwilliam , Elizabeth believe , very early in life . Fitzwilliam had not a temper to bear the sort of competition in which we stood — the sort of preference which was often given Charlie . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth had not thought Fitzwilliam so bad as this — though Elizabeth have never liked Fitzwilliam . Elizabeth had not thought so very ill of Fitzwilliam . Elizabeth had supposed Fitzwilliam to be despising Fitzwilliam fellow - creatures in general , but did not suspect Fitzwilliam of descending to such malicious revenge , such injustice , such inhumanity as this . ” 
 
  After a few minutes ’ reflection , however , Elizabeth continued , “ Elizabeth do remember Fitzwilliam boasting one day , at Netherfield , of the implacability of Fitzwilliam resentments , of Fitzwilliam having an unforgiving temper . Fitzwilliam disposition must be dreadful . ” 
 
  “ Charlie will not trust Charlie on the subject , ” replied Charlie ; “ Charlie can hardly be just to Fitzwilliam . ” Elizabeth Elizabeth was again deep in thought , and after a time exclaimed , “ To treat in such a manner Fitzwilliam Fitzwilliam father ! ” Elizabeth could have added , “ A young man , too , like Charlie , whose very countenance may vouch for Charlie being amiable”—but Elizabeth contented Elizabeth with , “ and one , too , who had probably been Fitzwilliam companion from childhood , connected together , as Elizabeth think Charlie said , in the closest manner ! ” 
 
  “ William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s five cousins were born in the same parish , within the same park ; the greatest part of William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s five cousins youth was passed together ; inmates of the same house , sharing the same amusements , objects of the same parental care . Charlie father began life in the profession which Charlie uncle , Mr. Phillips , appears to do so much credit to — but Fitzwilliam father , Miss Bennet , the late Fitzwilliam gave up everything to be of use to the late Fitzwilliam and devoted all Fitzwilliam father , Miss Bennet , the late Fitzwilliam time to the care of the Pemberley property . Fitzwilliam father , Miss Bennet , the late Fitzwilliam was most highly esteemed by Fitzwilliam , a most intimate , confidential friend . Fitzwilliam often acknowledged Fitzwilliam to be under the greatest obligations to Charlie father ’s active superintendence , and when , immediately before Fitzwilliam father , Miss Bennet , the late Fitzwilliam death , Fitzwilliam gave Fitzwilliam father , Miss Bennet , the late Fitzwilliam a voluntary promise of providing for Charlie , Charlie am convinced that Fitzwilliam felt a voluntary promise of providing for Charlie to be as much a debt of gratitude to Fitzwilliam father , Miss Bennet , the late Fitzwilliam , as of Fitzwilliam affection to Charlie . ” 
 
  “ How strange ! ” cried Elizabeth . “ How abominable ! Elizabeth wonder that the very pride of this Fitzwilliam has not made Fitzwilliam just to Charlie ! If from no better motive , that Fitzwilliam should not have been too proud to be dishonest — for dishonesty Elizabeth must call it . ” 
 
  “ It is wonderful , ” replied Charlie , “ for almost all Fitzwilliam actions may be traced to pride ; and pride had often been Fitzwilliam best friend . pride has connected Fitzwilliam nearer with virtue than with any other feeling . But we are none of we consistent , and in Fitzwilliam behaviour to Elizabeth there were stronger impulses even than pride . ” 
 
  “ Can such abominable pride as Fitzwilliam have ever done Fitzwilliam good ? ” 
 
  “ Yes . pride has often led Fitzwilliam to be liberal and generous , to give Fitzwilliam money freely , to display hospitality , to assist Fitzwilliam tenants , and relieve the poor . Family pride , and filial pride — for Fitzwilliam is very proud of what Fitzwilliam father , Miss Bennet , the late Fitzwilliam was — have done this . Not to appear to disgrace Fitzwilliam family , to degenerate from the popular qualities , or lose the influence of the Pemberley property , is a powerful motive . Fitzwilliam has also brotherly pride , which , with some brotherly affection , makes Fitzwilliam a very kind and careful guardian of Fitzwilliam sister , and you will hear Fitzwilliam generally cried up as the most attentive and best of brothers . ” 
 
  “ What sort of girl is Fitzwilliam sister ? ” 
 
  Charlie shook Charlie head . “ Charlie wish Charlie could call Fitzwilliam sister amiable . It gives Charlie pain to speak ill of a Darcy . But Fitzwilliam sister is too much like Fitzwilliam sister brother — very , very proud . As a child , Fitzwilliam sister was affectionate and pleasing , and extremely fond of Charlie ; and Charlie have devoted hours and hours to Fitzwilliam sister amusement . But Fitzwilliam sister is nothing to Charlie now . Fitzwilliam sister is a handsome girl , about fifteen or sixteen , and , Charlie understand , highly accomplished . Since Fitzwilliam father , Miss Bennet , the late Fitzwilliam death , Fitzwilliam sister home has been London , where a lady lives with Fitzwilliam sister , and superintends Fitzwilliam sister education . ” 
 
  After many pauses and many trials of other subjects , Elizabeth could not help reverting once more to the first , and saying : 
 
  “ Elizabeth am astonished at Fitzwilliam intimacy with Charlie ! How can Charlie , be in friendship with Fitzwilliam ? How can Mr. and Mrs. Phillips suit each other ? Do Elizabeth know Charlie ? ” 
 
  “ Not at all . ” 
 
  “ Charlie is a sweet - tempered , amiable , charming man . Charlie can not know what Fitzwilliam is . ” 
 
  “ Probably not ; but Fitzwilliam can please where Fitzwilliam chooses . Fitzwilliam does not want abilities . Fitzwilliam can be a conversible companion if Fitzwilliam thinks it worth Fitzwilliam while . Among those who are at all Fitzwilliam equals in consequence , Fitzwilliam is a very different man from what Fitzwilliam is to the less prosperous . Fitzwilliam pride never deserts Fitzwilliam ; but with the rich Fitzwilliam is liberal - minded , just , sincere , rational , honourable , and perhaps agreeable — allowing something for fortune and figure . ” 
 
  The whist party soon afterwards breaking up , the players gathered round the other table and William Collins ’s took William Collins ’s station between William Collins ’s cousin Elizabeth and Mrs. Phillips . The usual enquiries as to William Collins ’s success were made by Mrs. Phillips . William Collins ’s success had not been very great ; William Collins ’s had lost every point ; but when Mrs. Phillips began to express Mrs. Phillips concern thereupon , William Collins ’s assured Mrs. Phillips with much earnest gravity that it was not of the least importance , that William Collins ’s considered the money as a mere trifle , and begged that Mrs. Phillips would not make Mrs. Phillips uneasy . 
 
  “ William Collins ’s know very well , Mrs. Phillips , ” said William Collins ’s , “ that when persons sit down to a card - table , persons must take persons chances of these things , and happily William Collins ’s am not in such circumstances as to make five shillings any object . There are undoubtedly many who could not say the same , but thanks to Cathleen ’s , William Collins ’s am removed far beyond the necessity of regarding little matters . ” 
 
  Charlie ’s attention was caught ; and after observing William Collins ’s for a few moments , Charlie asked Elizabeth in a low voice whether William Collins ’s was very intimately acquainted with the family of de Bourgh . 
 
  “ Cathleen ’s , ” Elizabeth replied , “ has very lately given William Collins ’s a living . Elizabeth hardly know how William Collins ’s was first introduced to Cathleen ’s notice , but William Collins ’s certainly has not known Cathleen ’s long . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth know of course that Cathleen ’s and Lady Anne Darcy were sisters ; consequently that Cathleen ’s is aunt to the present Fitzwilliam . ” 
 
  “ No , indeed , Elizabeth did not . Elizabeth knew nothing at all of Cathleen ’s connections . Elizabeth never heard of Cathleen ’s existence till the day before yesterday . ” 
 
  “ Cathleen ’s , will have a very large fortune , and it is believed that Cathleen ’s and Fitzwilliam will unite the two estates . ” 
 
  This information made Elizabeth smile , as Elizabeth thought of poor Caroline . Vain indeed must be all poor Caroline attentions , vain and useless poor Caroline affection for poor Caroline sister and poor Caroline praise of poor Caroline , if poor Caroline were already self - destined for another . 
 
  “ William Collins ’s , ” said Elizabeth , “ speaks highly both of Cathleen ’s and Cathleen ’s ; but from some particulars that William Collins ’s has related of Cathleen ’s , Elizabeth suspect Fitzwilliam gratitude misleads Fitzwilliam , and that in spite of Cathleen ’s being Fitzwilliam patroness , Cathleen ’s is an arrogant , conceited woman . ” 
 
  “ Charlie believe Cathleen ’s to be both in a great degree , ” replied Charlie ; “ Charlie have not seen Cathleen ’s for many years , but Charlie very well remember that Charlie never liked Cathleen ’s , and that Cathleen ’s manners were dictatorial and insolent . Cathleen ’s has the reputation of being remarkably sensible and clever ; but Charlie rather believe Cathleen ’s derives part of Cathleen ’s abilities from Cathleen ’s rank and fortune , part from Cathleen ’s authoritative manner , and the rest from the pride of Fitzwilliam Fitzwilliam should have an understanding of the first class . ” Elizabeth Elizabeth allowed that Charlie had given a very rational account of it , and they continued talking together , with mutual satisfaction till supper put an end to cards , and gave the rest of the ladies the rest of the ladies share of Charlie ’s attentions . There could be no conversation in the noise of Mrs. Phillips ’s supper party , but Fitzwilliam manners recommended Fitzwilliam to everybody . Whatever Fitzwilliam said , was said well ; and whatever Fitzwilliam did , done gracefully . Elizabeth went away with Elizabeth head full of Fitzwilliam . Elizabeth could think of nothing but of Charlie , and of what Fitzwilliam had told Elizabeth , all the way home ; but there was not time for Elizabeth even to mention Fitzwilliam name as they went , for neither Lydia nor William Collins ’s were once silent . Lydia talked incessantly of lottery tickets , of the fish Lydia had lost and the fish Lydia had won ; and William Collins ’s in describing the civility of Mr. and Mrs. Phillips , protesting that Fitzwilliam did not in the least regard Fitzwilliam losses at whist , enumerating all the dishes at supper , and repeatedly fearing that Fitzwilliam crowded Fitzwilliam cousins , had more to say than Fitzwilliam could well manage before the coach stopped at the house . 
 Chapter 
 
  Elizabeth related to Jane the next day what had passed between Charlie and Elizabeth . Jane listened with astonishment and concern ; Jane knew not how to believe that Charlie could be so unworthy of Charlie regard ; and yet , it was not in Jane nature to question the veracity of a young man of such amiable appearance as George . The possibility of George having endured such unkindness , was enough to interest all Jane tender feelings ; and nothing remained therefore to be done , but to think well of them both , to defend the conduct of each , and throw into the account of accident or mistake whatever could not be otherwise explained . 
 
  “ them both have both , ” said Jane , “ been deceived , Jane dare say , in some way or other , of which we can form no idea . Interested people have perhaps misrepresented each to the other . It is , in short , impossible for us to conjecture the causes or circumstances which may have alienated them both , without actual blame on either side . ” 
 
  “ Very true , indeed ; and now , my dear Jane , what have Jane got to say on behalf of the interested people who have probably been concerned in the business ? Do clear the interested people who have probably been concerned in the business too , or we shall be obliged to think ill of somebody . ” 
 
  “ Laugh as much as Elizabeth choose , but Elizabeth will not laugh Jane out of Jane opinion . My dearest Elizabeth , do but consider in what a disgraceful light it places Charlie , to be treating Charlie father ’s favourite in such a manner , Charlie father ’s favourite . treating is impossible . No man of common humanity , no man who had any value for Charlie character , could be capable of treating . Can Charlie most intimate friends be so excessively deceived in Charlie ? Oh ! no . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth can much more easily believe Charlie being imposed on , than that Charlie should invent such a history of Charlie as Charlie gave Elizabeth last night ; names , facts , everything mentioned without ceremony . If it be not so , let Charlie contradict such a history of Charlie as Charlie gave Elizabeth last night ; names , facts , everything mentioned without ceremony . Besides , there was truth in Charlie looks . ” 
 
  “ It is difficult indeed — it is distressing . One does not know what to think . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth beg Jane pardon ; one knows exactly what to think . ” 
 
  But Jane could think with certainty on only one point — that Charlie , if Charlie had been imposed on , would have much to suffer when the affair became public . 
 
  The two young ladies were summoned from the shrubbery , where this conversation passed , by the arrival of the very persons of whom The two young ladies had been speaking ; Charlie and Charlie sisters came to give Charlie and Charlie sisters personal invitation for the long - expected ball at Netherfield , which was fixed for the following Tuesday . The two young ladies were delighted to see The two young ladies dear friend again , called it an age since The two young ladies had met , and repeatedly asked what Charlie father ’s favourite had been doing with Charlie father ’s favourite since their separation . To the rest of the family The two young ladies paid little attention ; avoiding Mother as much as possible , saying not much to Elizabeth , and nothing at all to the others . The two young ladies were soon gone again , rising from The two young ladies seats with an activity which took The two young ladies brother by surprise , and hurrying off as if eager to escape from Mother ’s civilities . 
 
  The prospect of the long - expected ball at Netherfield , which was fixed for the following Tuesday was extremely agreeable to every female of the family . Mother chose to consider it as given in compliment to Charlie father ’s favourite , and was particularly flattered by receiving the invitation from Charlie , instead of a ceremonious card . Jane pictured to Jane a happy evening in the society of Jane two friends , and the attentions of Jane two friends brother ; and Elizabeth thought with pleasure of dancing a great deal with Charlie , and of seeing a confirmation of everything in Charlie look and behaviour . The happiness anticipated by Catherine and Lydia depended less on any single event , or any particular person , for though Catherine and Lydia each , like Elizabeth , meant to dance half the evening with Charlie , Charlie was by no means the only partner who could satisfy Catherine and Lydia , and a ball was , at any rate , a ball . And even Mary could assure the family that even Mary had no disinclination for it . 
 
  “ While even Mary can have even Mary mornings to even Mary , ” said even Mary , “ it is enough — even Mary think it is no sacrifice to join occasionally in evening engagements . Society has claims on us all ; and even Mary profess even Mary one of those who consider intervals of recreation and amusement as desirable for everybody . ” Elizabeth Elizabeth ’s spirits were so high on this occasion , that though Elizabeth did not often speak unnecessarily to William Collins , Elizabeth could not help asking William Collins whether William Collins intended to accept Charlie and Charlie sisters personal invitation for the long - expected ball at Netherfield , which was fixed for the following Tuesday , and if William Collins did , whether William Collins would think it proper to join in the evening ’s amusement ; and Elizabeth was rather surprised to find that William Collins entertained no scruple whatever on that head , and was very far from dreading a rebuke either from the Archbishop , or Cathleen , by venturing to dance . 
 
  “ William Collins am by no means of the opinion , William Collins assure Elizabeth , ” said William Collins , “ that a ball of this kind , given by a young man of character , to respectable people , can have any evil tendency ; and William Collins am so far from objecting to dancing William Collins , that William Collins shall hope to be honoured with the hands of all William Collins fair cousins in the course of the evening ; and William Collins take this opportunity of soliciting Elizabeth , Miss Elizabeth , for the two first dances especially , a preference which William Collins trust William Collins cousin Jane will attribute to the right cause , and not to any disrespect for William Collins cousin Jane . ” 
 
  Elizabeth felt Elizabeth completely taken in . Elizabeth had fully proposed being engaged by Charlie for the two first dances especially ; and to have William Collins instead ! Elizabeth liveliness had never been worse timed . There was no help for it , however . Charlie ’s happiness and Elizabeth own were perforce delayed a little longer , and William Collins ’s proposal accepted with as good a grace as Elizabeth could . Elizabeth was not the better pleased with William Collins gallantry from the idea William Collins gallantry suggested of something more . It now first struck Elizabeth , that Elizabeth was selected from among Elizabeth sisters as worthy of being mistress of Hunsford Parsonage , and of assisting to form a quadrille table at Rosings , in the absence of more eligible visitors . The idea soon reached to conviction , as Elizabeth observed William Collins increasing civilities toward Elizabeth , and heard William Collins frequent attempt at a compliment on Elizabeth wit and vivacity ; and though more astonished than gratified Elizabeth by this effect of Elizabeth charms , it was not long before Elizabeth mother gave Elizabeth to understand that the probability of their marriage was extremely agreeable to Mother . Elizabeth , however , did not choose to take the hint , being well aware that a serious dispute must be the consequence of any reply . William Collins might never make William Collins ’s proposal , and till William Collins did , it was useless to quarrel about William Collins . 
 
  If there had not been a Netherfield ball to prepare for and talk of , the younger Miss Bennets would have been in a very pitiable state at this time , for from the day of Charlie and Charlie sisters personal invitation for the long - expected ball at Netherfield , which was fixed for the following Tuesday , to the day of the long - expected ball at Netherfield , which was fixed for the following Tuesday , there was such a succession of rain as prevented the younger Miss Bennets walking to Meryton once . No aunt , no officers , no news could be sought after — the very shoe - roses for Netherfield were got by proxy . Even Elizabeth might have found some trial of Elizabeth patience in weather which totally suspended the improvement of Elizabeth acquaintance with Charlie ; and nothing less than a dance on Tuesday , could have made such a Friday , Saturday , Sunday , and Monday endurable to Catherine and Lydia . 
 Chapter 
 
 Till Elizabeth entered the drawing-room at Netherfield, and looked in vain for Charlie among the cluster of red coats there assembled, a doubt of his being present had never occurred to her. The certainty of meeting him had not been checked by any of those recollections that might not unreasonably have alarmed her. She had dressed with more than usual care, and prepared in the highest spirits for the conquest of all that remained unsubdued of his heart, trusting that it was not more than might be won in the course of the evening. But in an instant arose the dreadful suspicion of his being purposely omitted for Fitzwilliam’s pleasure in the Bingleys’ invitation to the officers; and though this was not exactly the case, the absolute fact of his absence was pronounced by his friend Denny, to whom Lydia eagerly applied, and who told them that George had been obliged to go to town on business the day before, and was not yet returned; adding, with a significant smile, “I do not imagine his business would have called him away just now, if he had not wanted to avoid a certain gentleman here.”
 
 This part of his intelligence, though unheard by Lydia, was caught by Elizabeth, and, as it assured her that Fitzwilliam was not less answerable for George’s absence than if her first surmise had been just, every feeling of displeasure against the former was so sharpened by immediate disappointment, that she could hardly reply with tolerable civility to the polite enquiries which he directly afterwards approached to make. Attendance, forbearance, patience with Fitzwilliam, was injury to George. She was resolved against any sort of conversation with him, and turned away with a degree of ill-humour which she could not wholly surmount even in speaking to Charles, whose blind partiality provoked her.
 
 But Elizabeth was not formed for ill-humour; and though every prospect of her own was destroyed for the evening, it could not dwell long on her spirits; and having told all her griefs to Charlotte Lucas, whom she had not seen for a week, she was soon able to make a voluntary transition to the oddities of her cousin, and to point him out to her particular notice. The first two dances, however, brought a return of distress; they were dances of mortification. William Collins, awkward and solemn, apologising instead of attending, and often moving wrong without being aware of it, gave her all the shame and misery which a disagreeable partner for a couple of dances can give. The moment of her release from him was ecstasy.
 
 She danced next with an officer, and had the refreshment of talking of George, and of hearing that he was universally liked. When those dances were over, she returned to Charlotte Lucas, and was in conversation with her, when she found herself suddenly addressed by Fitzwilliam who took her so much by surprise in his application for her hand, that, without knowing what she did, she accepted him. He walked away again immediately, and she was left to fret over her own want of presence of mind; Charlotte tried to console her:
 
 “I dare say you will find him very agreeable.”
 
 “Heaven forbid! That would be the greatest misfortune of all! To find a man agreeable whom one is determined to hate! Do not wish me such an evil.”
 
 When the dancing recommenced, however, and Fitzwilliam approached to claim her hand, Charlotte could not help cautioning her in a whisper, not to be a simpleton, and allow her fancy for George to make her appear unpleasant in the eyes of a man ten times his consequence. Elizabeth made no answer, and took her place in the set, amazed at the dignity to which she was arrived in being allowed to stand opposite to Fitzwilliam, and reading in her neighbours’ looks, their equal amazement in beholding it. They stood for some time without speaking a word; and she began to imagine that their silence was to last through the two dances, and at first was resolved not to break it; till suddenly fancying that it would be the greater punishment to her partner to oblige him to talk, she made some slight observation on the dance. He replied, and was again silent. After a pause of some minutes, she addressed him a second time with:—“It is your turn to say something now, Fitzwilliam. I talked about the dance, and you ought to make some sort of remark on the size of the room, or the number of couples.”
 
 He smiled, and assured her that whatever she wished him to say should be said.
 
 “Very well. That reply will do for the present. Perhaps by and by I may observe that private balls are much pleasanter than public ones. But now we may be silent.”
 
 “Do you talk by rule, then, while you are dancing?”
 
 “Sometimes. One must speak a little, you know. It would look odd to be entirely silent for half an hour together; and yet for the advantage of some, conversation ought to be so arranged, as that they may have the trouble of saying as little as possible.”
 
 “Are you consulting your own feelings in the present case, or do you imagine that you are gratifying mine?”
 
 “Both,” replied Elizabeth archly; “for I have always seen a great similarity in the turn of our minds. We are each of an unsocial, taciturn disposition, unwilling to speak, unless we expect to say something that will amaze the whole room, and be handed down to posterity with all the éclat of a proverb.”
 
 “This is no very striking resemblance of your own character, I am sure,” said he. “How near it may be to mine, I cannot pretend to say. You think it a faithful portrait undoubtedly.”
 
 “I must not decide on my own performance.”
 
 He made no answer, and they were again silent till they had gone down the dance, when he asked her if she and her sisters did not very often walk to Meryton. She answered in the affirmative, and, unable to resist the temptation, added, “When you met us there the other day, we had just been forming a new acquaintance.”
 
 The effect was immediate. A deeper shade of hauteur overspread his features, but he said not a word, and Elizabeth, though blaming herself for her own weakness, could not go on. At length Fitzwilliam spoke, and in a constrained manner said, “Charlie is blessed with such happy manners as may ensure his making friends—whether he may be equally capable of retaining them, is less certain.”
 
 “He has been so unlucky as to lose your friendship,” replied Elizabeth with emphasis, “and in a manner which he is likely to suffer from all his life.”
 
 Fitzwilliam made no answer, and seemed desirous of changing the subject. At that moment, Sir William Lucas appeared close to them, meaning to pass through the set to the other side of the room; but on perceiving Fitzwilliam, he stopped with a bow of superior courtesy to compliment him on his dancing and his partner.
 
 “I have been most highly gratified indeed, my dear sir. Such very superior dancing is not often seen. It is evident that you belong to the first circles. Allow me to say, however, that your fair partner does not disgrace you, and that I must hope to have this pleasure often repeated, especially when a certain desirable event, my dear Elizabeth (glancing at her sister and Charles) shall take place. What congratulations will then flow in! I appeal to Fitzwilliam:—but let me not interrupt you, sir. You will not thank me for detaining you from the bewitching converse of that young lady, whose bright eyes are also upbraiding me.”
 
 The latter part of this address was scarcely heard by Fitzwilliam; but Sir William’s allusion to his friend seemed to strike him forcibly, and his eyes were directed with a very serious expression towards Charles and Jane, who were dancing together. Recovering himself, however, shortly, he turned to his partner, and said, “Sir William’s interruption has made me forget what we were talking of.”
 
 “I do not think we were speaking at all. Sir William could not have interrupted two people in the room who had less to say for themselves. We have tried two or three subjects already without success, and what we are to talk of next I cannot imagine.”
 
 “What think you of books?” said he, smiling.
 
 “Books—oh! no. I am sure we never read the same, or not with the same feelings.”
 
 “I am sorry you think so; but if that be the case, there can at least be no want of subject. We may compare our different opinions.”
 
 “No—I cannot talk of books in a ball-room; my head is always full of something else.”
 
 “The present always occupies you in such scenes—does it?” said he, with a look of doubt.
 
 “Yes, always,” she replied, without knowing what she said, for her thoughts had wandered far from the subject, as soon afterwards appeared by her suddenly exclaiming, “I remember hearing you once say, Fitzwilliam, that you hardly ever forgave, that your resentment once created was unappeasable. You are very cautious, I suppose, as to its being created?”
 
 “I am,” said he, with a firm voice.
 
 “And never allow yourself to be blinded by prejudice?”
 
 “I hope not.”
 
 “It is particularly incumbent on those who never change their opinion, to be secure of judging properly at first.”
 
 “May I ask to what these questions tend?”
 
 “Merely to the illustration of your character,” said she, endeavouring to shake off her gravity. “I am trying to make it out.”
 
 “And what is your success?”
 
 She shook her head. “I do not get on at all. I hear such different accounts of you as puzzle me exceedingly.”
 
 “I can readily believe,” answered he gravely, “that reports may vary greatly with respect to me; and I could wish, Miss Bennet, that you were not to sketch my character at the present moment, as there is reason to fear that the performance would reflect no credit on either.”
 
 “But if I do not take your likeness now, I may never have another opportunity.”
 
 “I would by no means suspend any pleasure of yours,” he coldly replied. She said no more, and they went down the other dance and parted in silence; and on each side dissatisfied, though not to an equal degree, for in Fitzwilliam’s breast there was a tolerably powerful feeling towards her, which soon procured her pardon, and directed all his anger against another.
 
 They had not long separated, when Caroline came towards her, and with an expression of civil disdain accosted her:
 
 “So, Elizabeth, I hear you are quite delighted with George! Your sister has been talking to me about him, and asking me a thousand questions; and I find that the young man quite forgot to tell you, among his other communication, that he was the son of old George, the late Fitzwilliam’s steward. Let me recommend you, however, as a friend, not to give implicit confidence to all his assertions; for as to Fitzwilliam’s using him ill, it is perfectly false; for, on the contrary, he has always been remarkably kind to him, though George has treated Fitzwilliam in a most infamous manner. I do not know the particulars, but I know very well that Fitzwilliam is not in the least to blame, that he cannot bear to hear George mentioned, and that though my brother thought that he could not well avoid including him in his invitation to the officers, he was excessively glad to find that he had taken himself out of the way. His coming into the country at all is a most insolent thing, indeed, and I wonder how he could presume to do it. I pity you, Elizabeth, for this discovery of your favourite’s guilt; but really, considering his descent, one could not expect much better.”
 
 “His guilt and his descent appear by your account to be the same,” said Elizabeth angrily; “for I have heard you accuse him of nothing worse than of being the son of Fitzwilliam’s steward, and of that, I can assure you, he informed me himself.”
 
 “I beg your pardon,” replied Caroline, turning away with a sneer. “Excuse my interference—it was kindly meant.”
 
 “Insolent girl!” said Elizabeth to herself. “You are much mistaken if you expect to influence me by such a paltry attack as this. I see nothing in it but your own wilful ignorance and the malice of Fitzwilliam.” She then sought her eldest sister, who had undertaken to make enquiries on the same subject of Charles. Jane met her with a smile of such sweet complacency, a glow of such happy expression, as sufficiently marked how well she was satisfied with the occurrences of the evening. Elizabeth instantly read her feelings, and at that moment solicitude for George, resentment against his enemies, and everything else, gave way before the hope of Jane’s being in the fairest way for happiness.
 
 “I want to know,” said she, with a countenance no less smiling than her sister’s, “what you have learnt about Charlie. But perhaps you have been too pleasantly engaged to think of any third person; in which case you may be sure of my pardon.”
 
 “No,” replied Jane, “I have not forgotten him; but I have nothing satisfactory to tell you. Charles does not know the whole of his history, and is quite ignorant of the circumstances which have principally offended Fitzwilliam; but he will vouch for the good conduct, the probity, and honour of his friend, and is perfectly convinced that Charlie has deserved much less attention from Fitzwilliam than he has received; and I am sorry to say by his account as well as his sister’s, Charlie is by no means a respectable young man. I am afraid he has been very imprudent, and has deserved to lose Fitzwilliam’s regard.”
 
 “Charles does not know Charlie himself?”
 
 “No; he never saw him till the other morning at Meryton.”
 
 “This account then is what he has received from Fitzwilliam. I am satisfied. But what does he say of the living?”
 
 “He does not exactly recollect the circumstances, though he has heard them from Fitzwilliam more than once, but he believes that it was left to him conditionally only.”
 
 “I have not a doubt of Charles’s sincerity,” said Elizabeth warmly; “but you must excuse my not being convinced by assurances only. Charles’s defense of his friend was a very able one, I dare say; but since he is unacquainted with several parts of the story, and has learnt the rest from that friend himself, I shall venture to still think of both gentlemen as I did before.”
 
 She then changed the discourse to one more gratifying to each, and on which there could be no difference of sentiment. Elizabeth listened with delight to the happy, though modest hopes which Jane entertained of Charles’s regard, and said all in her power to heighten her confidence in it. On their being joined by Charles himself, Elizabeth withdrew to Miss Lucas; to whose enquiry after the pleasantness of her last partner she had scarcely replied, before William Collins came up to them, and told her with great exultation that he had just been so fortunate as to make a most important discovery.
 
 “I have found out,” said he, “by a singular accident, that there is now in the room a near relation of my patroness. I happened to overhear the gentleman himself mentioning to the young lady who does the honours of the house the names of his cousin Cathleen, and of her mother Cathleen. How wonderfully these sort of things occur! Who would have thought of my meeting with, perhaps, a nephew of Cathleen in this assembly! I am most thankful that the discovery is made in time for me to pay my respects to him, which I am now going to do, and trust he will excuse my not having done it before. My total ignorance of the connection must plead my apology.”
 
 “You are not going to introduce yourself to Fitzwilliam!”
 
 “Indeed I am. I shall entreat his pardon for not having done it earlier. I believe him to be Cathleen’s nephew. It will be in my power to assure him that her ladyship was quite well yesterday se’nnight.”
 
 Elizabeth tried hard to dissuade him from such a scheme, assuring him that Fitzwilliam would consider his addressing him without introduction as an impertinent freedom, rather than a compliment to his aunt; that it was not in the least necessary there should be any notice on either side; and that if it were, it must belong to Fitzwilliam, the superior in consequence, to begin the acquaintance. William Collins listened to her with the determined air of following his own inclination, and, when she ceased speaking, replied thus:
 
 “My dear Elizabeth, I have the highest opinion in the world in your excellent judgement in all matters within the scope of your understanding; but permit me to say, that there must be a wide difference between the established forms of ceremony amongst the laity, and those which regulate the clergy; for, give me leave to observe that I consider the clerical office as equal in point of dignity with the highest rank in the kingdom—provided that a proper humility of behaviour is at the same time maintained. You must therefore allow me to follow the dictates of my conscience on this occasion, which leads me to perform what I look on as a point of duty. Pardon me for neglecting to profit by your advice, which on every other subject shall be my constant guide, though in the case before us I consider myself more fitted by education and habitual study to decide on what is right than a young lady like yourself.” And with a low bow he left her to attack Fitzwilliam, whose reception of his advances she eagerly watched, and whose astonishment at being so addressed was very evident. Her cousin prefaced his speech with a solemn bow and though she could not hear a word of it, she felt as if hearing it all, and saw in the motion of his lips the words “apology,” “Hunsford,” and “Cathleen.” It vexed her to see him expose himself to such a man. Fitzwilliam was eyeing him with unrestrained wonder, and when at last William Collins allowed him time to speak, replied with an air of distant civility. William Collins, however, was not discouraged from speaking again, and Fitzwilliam’s contempt seemed abundantly increasing with the length of his second speech, and at the end of it he only made him a slight bow, and moved another way. William Collins then returned to Elizabeth.
 
 “I have no reason, I assure you,” said he, “to be dissatisfied with my reception. Fitzwilliam seemed much pleased with the attention. He answered me with the utmost civility, and even paid me the compliment of saying that he was so well convinced of Cathleen’s discernment as to be certain she could never bestow a favour unworthily. It was really a very handsome thought. Upon the whole, I am much pleased with him.”
 
 As Elizabeth had no longer any interest of her own to pursue, she turned her attention almost entirely on her sister and Charles; and the train of agreeable reflections which her observations gave birth to, made her perhaps almost as happy as Jane. She saw her in idea settled in that very house, in all the felicity which a marriage of true affection could bestow; and she felt capable, under such circumstances, of endeavouring even to like Charles’s two sisters. Her mother’s thoughts she plainly saw were bent the same way, and she determined not to venture near her, lest she might hear too much. When they sat down to supper, therefore, she considered it a most unlucky perverseness which placed them within one of each other; and deeply was she vexed to find that her mother was talking to that one person (Lady Lucas) freely, openly, and of nothing else but her expectation that Jane would soon be married to Charles. It was an animating subject, and Mother seemed incapable of fatigue while enumerating the advantages of the match. His being such a charming young man, and so rich, and living but three miles from them, were the first points of self-gratulation; and then it was such a comfort to think how fond the two sisters were of Jane, and to be certain that they must desire the connection as much as she could do. It was, moreover, such a promising thing for her younger daughters, as Jane’s marrying so greatly must throw them in the way of other rich men; and lastly, it was so pleasant at her time of life to be able to consign her single daughters to the care of their sister, that she might not be obliged to go into company more than she liked. It was necessary to make this circumstance a matter of pleasure, because on such occasions it is the etiquette; but no one was less likely than Mother to find comfort in staying home at any period of her life. She concluded with many good wishes that Lady Lucas might soon be equally fortunate, though evidently and triumphantly believing there was no chance of it.
 
 In vain did Elizabeth endeavour to check the rapidity of her mother’s words, or persuade her to describe her felicity in a less audible whisper; for, to her inexpressible vexation, she could perceive that the chief of it was overheard by Fitzwilliam, who sat opposite to them. Her mother only scolded her for being nonsensical.
 
 “What is Fitzwilliam to me, pray, that I should be afraid of him? I am sure we owe him no such particular civility as to be obliged to say nothing he may not like to hear.”
 
 “For heaven’s sake, madam, speak lower. What advantage can it be for you to offend Fitzwilliam? You will never recommend yourself to his friend by so doing!”
 
 Nothing that she could say, however, had any influence. Her mother would talk of her views in the same intelligible tone. Elizabeth blushed and blushed again with shame and vexation. She could not help frequently glancing her eye at Fitzwilliam, though every glance convinced her of what she dreaded; for though he was not always looking at her mother, she was convinced that his attention was invariably fixed by her. The expression of his face changed gradually from indignant contempt to a composed and steady gravity.
 
 At length, however, Mother had no more to say; and Lady Lucas, who had been long yawning at the repetition of delights which she saw no likelihood of sharing, was left to the comforts of cold ham and chicken. Elizabeth now began to revive. But not long was the interval of tranquillity; for, when supper was over, singing was talked of, and she had the mortification of seeing Mary, after very little entreaty, preparing to oblige the company. By many significant looks and silent entreaties, did she endeavour to prevent such a proof of complaisance, but in vain; Mary would not understand them; such an opportunity of exhibiting was delightful to her, and she began her song. Elizabeth’s eyes were fixed on her with most painful sensations, and she watched her progress through the several stanzas with an impatience which was very ill rewarded at their close; for Mary, on receiving, amongst the thanks of the table, the hint of a hope that she might be prevailed on to favour them again, after the pause of half a minute began another. Mary’s powers were by no means fitted for such a display; her voice was weak, and her manner affected. Elizabeth was in agonies. She looked at Jane, to see how she bore it; but Jane was very composedly talking to Charles. She looked at his two sisters, and saw them making signs of derision at each other, and at Fitzwilliam, who continued, however, imperturbably grave. She looked at her father to entreat his interference, lest Mary should be singing all night. He took the hint, and when Mary had finished her second song, said aloud, “That will do extremely well, child. You have delighted us long enough. Let the other young ladies have time to exhibit.”
 
 Mary, though pretending not to hear, was somewhat disconcerted; and Elizabeth, sorry for her, and sorry for her father’s speech, was afraid her anxiety had done no good. Others of the party were now applied to.
 
 “If I,” said William Collins, “were so fortunate as to be able to sing, I should have great pleasure, I am sure, in obliging the company with an air; for I consider music as a very innocent diversion, and perfectly compatible with the profession of a clergyman. I do not mean, however, to assert that we can be justified in devoting too much of our time to music, for there are certainly other things to be attended to. The rector of a parish has much to do. In the first place, he must make such an agreement for tithes as may be beneficial to himself and not offensive to his patron. He must write his own sermons; and the time that remains will not be too much for his parish duties, and the care and improvement of his dwelling, which he cannot be excused from making as comfortable as possible. And I do not think it of light importance that he should have attentive and conciliatory manners towards everybody, especially towards those to whom he owes his preferment. I cannot acquit him of that duty; nor could I think well of the man who should omit an occasion of testifying his respect towards anybody connected with the family.” And with a bow to Fitzwilliam, he concluded his speech, which had been spoken so loud as to be heard by half the room. Many stared—many smiled; but no one looked more amused than Father himself, while his wife seriously commended William Collins for having spoken so sensibly, and observed in a half-whisper to Lady Lucas, that he was a remarkably clever, good kind of young man.
 
 To Elizabeth it appeared that, had her family made an agreement to expose themselves as much as they could during the evening, it would have been impossible for them to play their parts with more spirit or finer success; and happy did she think it for Charles and her sister that some of the exhibition had escaped his notice, and that his feelings were not of a sort to be much distressed by the folly which he must have witnessed. That his two sisters and Fitzwilliam, however, should have such an opportunity of ridiculing her relations, was bad enough, and she could not determine whether the silent contempt of the gentleman, or the insolent smiles of the ladies, were more intolerable.
 
 The rest of the evening brought her little amusement. She was teased by William Collins, who continued most perseveringly by her side, and though he could not prevail on her to dance with him again, put it out of her power to dance with others. In vain did she entreat him to stand up with somebody else, and offer to introduce him to any young lady in the room. He assured her, that as to dancing, he was perfectly indifferent to it; that his chief object was by delicate attentions to recommend himself to her and that he should therefore make a point of remaining close to her the whole evening. There was no arguing upon such a project. She owed her greatest relief to her friend Miss Lucas, who often joined them, and good-naturedly engaged William Collins’s conversation to herself.
 
 She was at least free from the offense of Fitzwilliam’s further notice; though often standing within a very short distance of her, quite disengaged, he never came near enough to speak. She felt it to be the probable consequence of her allusions to Charlie, and rejoiced in it.
 
 The Longbourn party were the last of all the company to depart, and, by a manoeuvre of Mother, had to wait for their carriage a quarter of an hour after everybody else was gone, which gave them time to see how heartily they were wished away by some of the family. Mrs. Hurst and her sister scarcely opened their mouths, except to complain of fatigue, and were evidently impatient to have the house to themselves. They repulsed every attempt of Mother at conversation, and by so doing threw a languor over the whole party, which was very little relieved by the long speeches of William Collins, who was complimenting Charles and his sisters on the elegance of their entertainment, and the hospitality and politeness which had marked their behaviour to their guests. Fitzwilliam said nothing at all. Father, in equal silence, was enjoying the scene. Charles and Jane were standing together, a little detached from the rest, and talked only to each other. Elizabeth preserved as steady a silence as either Mrs. Hurst or Caroline; and even Lydia was too much fatigued to utter more than the occasional exclamation of “Lord, how tired I am!” accompanied by a violent yawn.
 
 When at length they arose to take leave, Mother was most pressingly civil in her hope of seeing the whole family soon at Longbourn, and addressed herself especially to Charles, to assure him how happy he would make them by eating a family dinner with them at any time, without the ceremony of a formal invitation. Charles was all grateful pleasure, and he readily engaged for taking the earliest opportunity of waiting on her, after his return from London, whither he was obliged to go the next day for a short time.
 
 Mother was perfectly satisfied, and quitted the house under the delightful persuasion that, allowing for the necessary preparations of settlements, new carriages, and wedding clothes, she should undoubtedly see her daughter settled at Netherfield in the course of three or four months. Of having another daughter married to William Collins, she thought with equal certainty, and with considerable, though not equal, pleasure. Elizabeth was the least dear to her of all her children; and though the man and the match were quite good enough for her, the worth of each was eclipsed by Charles and Netherfield.
 Chapter 
 
  The next day opened a new scene at Longbourn . William Collins made William Collins declaration in form . Having resolved to do made without loss of time , as William Collins leave of absence extended only to the following Saturday , and having no feelings of diffidence to make it distressing to William Collins even at the moment , William Collins set about made in a very orderly manner , with all the observances , which William Collins supposed a regular part of the business . On finding Mother , Elizabeth , and one of the younger girls together , soon after breakfast , William Collins addressed the mother in these words : 
 
  “ May William Collins hope , Mother , for Mother interest with Mother fair daughter Elizabeth , when William Collins solicit for the honour of a private audience with Elizabeth in the course of this morning ? ” 
 
  Before Elizabeth had time for anything but a blush of surprise , Mother answered instantly , “ Oh dear!—yes — certainly . Mother am sure Elizabeth will be very happy — Mother am sure Elizabeth can have no objection . Come , one of the younger girls , Mother want one of the younger girls up stairs . ” And , gathering Mother work together , Mother was hastening away , when Elizabeth called out : 
 
  “ Mother , do not go . Elizabeth beg Mother will not go . William Collins must excuse Elizabeth . William Collins can have nothing to say to Elizabeth that anybody need not hear . Elizabeth am going away Elizabeth . ” 
 
  “ No , no , nonsense , Elizabeth . Mother desire Elizabeth to stay where Elizabeth are . ” And upon Elizabeth ’s seeming really , with vexed and embarrassed looks , about to escape , Mother added : “ Elizabeth , Mother insist upon Elizabeth staying and hearing William Collins . ” 
 
  Elizabeth would not oppose such an injunction — and a moment ’s consideration making Elizabeth also sensible that it would be wisest to get it over as soon and as quietly as possible , Elizabeth sat down again and tried to conceal , by incessant employment the feelings which were divided between distress and diversion . Mother and one of the younger girls walked off , and as soon as Mother and one of the younger girls were gone , William Collins began . 
 
  “ Believe William Collins , William Collins dear Elizabeth , that Elizabeth modesty , so far from doing Elizabeth any disservice , rather adds to Elizabeth other perfections . Elizabeth would have been less amiable in William Collins eyes had there not been this little unwillingness ; but allow William Collins to assure Elizabeth , that William Collins have Elizabeth respected mother ’s permission for this address . Elizabeth can hardly doubt the purport of William Collins discourse , however Elizabeth natural delicacy may lead Elizabeth to dissemble ; William Collins attentions have been too marked to be mistaken . Almost as soon as William Collins entered the house , William Collins singled Elizabeth out as the companion of William Collins future life . But before William Collins am run away with by William Collins feelings on this subject , perhaps it would be advisable for William Collins to state William Collins reasons for marrying — and , moreover , for coming into Hertfordshire with the design of selecting a wife , as William Collins certainly did . ” 
 
  The idea of William Collins , with all William Collins solemn composure , being run away with by William Collins feelings , made Elizabeth so near laughing , that Elizabeth could not use the short pause William Collins allowed in any attempt to stop William Collins further , and William Collins continued : 
 
  “ William Collins reasons for marrying are , first , that William Collins think it a right thing for every clergyman in easy circumstances ( like William Collins ) to set the example of matrimony in every clergyman in easy circumstances ( like William Collins ) parish ; secondly , that William Collins am convinced that it will add very greatly to William Collins happiness ; and thirdly — which perhaps William Collins ought to have mentioned earlier , that it is the particular advice and recommendation of the very noble lady whom William Collins have the honour of calling patroness . Twice has the very noble lady whom William Collins have the honour of calling patroness condescended to give William Collins the very noble lady whom William Collins have the honour of calling patroness opinion ( unasked too ! ) on this subject ; and it was but the very Saturday night before William Collins left Hunsford — between our pools at quadrille , while Mrs. Jenkinson was arranging Cathleen ’s footstool , that the very noble lady whom William Collins have the honour of calling patroness said , ‘ William Collins , William Collins must marry . A clergyman like William Collins must marry . Choose properly , choose a gentlewoman for the very noble lady whom William Collins have the honour of calling patroness sake ; and for William Collins own , let a gentlewoman be an active , useful sort of person , not brought up high , but able to make a small income go a good way . This is the very noble lady whom William Collins have the honour of calling patroness advice . Find such a woman as soon as William Collins can , bring such a woman to Hunsford , and the very noble lady whom William Collins have the honour of calling patroness will visit such a woman . ’ Allow William Collins , by the way , to observe , Elizabeth , that William Collins do not reckon the notice and kindness of Cathleen ’s as among the least of the advantages in William Collins power to offer . Elizabeth will find Cathleen ’s manners beyond anything William Collins can describe ; and Elizabeth wit and vivacity , William Collins think , must be acceptable to Cathleen ’s , especially when tempered with the silence and respect which Cathleen ’s rank will inevitably excite . Thus much for William Collins general intention in favour of matrimony ; it remains to be told why William Collins views were directed towards Longbourn instead of William Collins own neighbourhood , where William Collins can assure Elizabeth there are many amiable young women . But the fact is , that being , as William Collins am , to inherit this estate after the death of Elizabeth honoured father ( who , however , may live many years longer ) , William Collins could not satisfy William Collins without resolving to choose a wife from among Elizabeth honoured father ( who , however , may live many years longer ) daughters , that the loss to Elizabeth honoured father ( who , however , may live many years longer ) daughters might be as little as possible , when the melancholy event takes place — which , however , as William Collins have already said , may not be for several years . This has been William Collins motive , William Collins fair cousin , and William Collins flatter William Collins This will not sink William Collins in Elizabeth esteem . And now nothing remains for William Collins but to assure Elizabeth in the most animated language of the violence of William Collins affection . To fortune William Collins am perfectly indifferent , and shall make no demand of that nature on Elizabeth honoured father ( who , however , may live many years longer ) , since William Collins am well aware that it could not be complied with ; and that one thousand pounds in the four per cents , which will not be Elizabeth till after Elizabeth mother ’s decease , is all that Elizabeth may ever be entitled to . On that head , therefore , William Collins shall be uniformly silent ; and Elizabeth may assure Elizabeth that no ungenerous reproach shall ever pass William Collins lips when we are married . ” 
 
  It was absolutely necessary to interrupt William Collins now . 
 
  “ William Collins are too hasty , William Collins , ” Elizabeth cried . “ William Collins forget that Elizabeth have made no answer . Let Elizabeth do it without further loss of time . Accept Elizabeth thanks for the compliment William Collins are paying Elizabeth . Elizabeth am very sensible of the honour of William Collins proposals , but it is impossible for Elizabeth to do otherwise than to decline William Collins proposals . ” 
 
  “ William Collins am not now to learn , ” replied William Collins , with a formal wave of the hand , “ that it is usual with young ladies to reject the addresses of the man whom young ladies secretly mean to accept , when the man whom young ladies secretly mean to accept first applies for young ladies favour ; and that sometimes reject is repeated a second , or even a third time . William Collins am therefore by no means discouraged by what Elizabeth have just said , and shall hope to lead Elizabeth to the altar ere long . ” 
 
  “ Upon Elizabeth word , William Collins , ” cried Elizabeth , “ William Collins hope is a rather extraordinary one after Elizabeth declaration . Elizabeth do assure William Collins that Elizabeth am not one of those young ladies ( if such young ladies there are ) who are so daring as to risk those young ladies ( if such young ladies there are ) who are so daring as to risk happiness on the chance of being asked a second time . Elizabeth am perfectly serious in Elizabeth refusal . William Collins could not make Elizabeth happy , and Elizabeth am convinced that Elizabeth am the last woman in the world who could make William Collins so . Nay , were Cathleen ’s to know Elizabeth , Elizabeth am persuaded Cathleen ’s would find Elizabeth in every respect ill qualified for the situation . ” 
 
  “ Were it certain that Cathleen ’s would think so , ” said William Collins very gravely—“but William Collins can not imagine that Cathleen ’s would at all disapprove of Elizabeth . And Elizabeth may be certain when William Collins have the honour of seeing Cathleen ’s again , William Collins shall speak in the very highest terms of Elizabeth modesty , economy , and other amiable qualification . ” 
 
  “ Indeed , William Collins , all praise of Elizabeth will be unnecessary . William Collins must give Elizabeth leave to judge for Elizabeth , and pay Elizabeth the compliment of believing what Elizabeth say . Elizabeth wish William Collins very happy and very rich , and by refusing William Collins hand , do all in Elizabeth power to prevent William Collins being otherwise . In making Elizabeth the offer , William Collins must have satisfied the delicacy of William Collins feelings with regard to Elizabeth family , and may take possession of this estate whenever this estate falls , without any self - reproach . This matter may be considered , therefore , as finally settled . ” And rising as Elizabeth thus spoke , Elizabeth would have quitted the room , had William Collins not thus addressed Elizabeth : 
 
  “ When William Collins do William Collins the honour of speaking to Elizabeth next on the subject , William Collins shall hope to receive a more favourable answer than Elizabeth have now given William Collins ; though William Collins am far from accusing Elizabeth of cruelty at present , because William Collins know it to be the established custom of Elizabeth sex to reject a man on the first application , and perhaps Elizabeth have even now said as much to encourage William Collins suit as would be consistent with the true delicacy of the female character . ” 
 
  “ Really , William Collins , ” cried Elizabeth with some warmth , “ William Collins puzzle Elizabeth exceedingly . If what Elizabeth have hitherto said can appear to William Collins in the form of encouragement , Elizabeth know not how to express Elizabeth refusal in such a way as to convince William Collins of Elizabeth refusal being one . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth must give William Collins leave to flatter William Collins , William Collins dear cousin , that Elizabeth refusal of William Collins addresses is merely words of course . William Collins reasons for believing it are briefly these : It does not appear to William Collins that William Collins hand is unworthy of Elizabeth acceptance , or that the establishment William Collins can offer would be any other than highly desirable . Elizabeth situation in life , Elizabeth connections with the family of de Bourgh , and Elizabeth relationship to William Collins own , are circumstances highly in Elizabeth favour ; and William Collins should take it into further consideration , that in spite of William Collins manifold attractions , it is by no means certain that another offer of marriage may ever be made William Collins . William Collins portion is unhappily so small that William Collins portion will in all likelihood undo the effects of William Collins loveliness and amiable qualifications . As Elizabeth must therefore conclude that William Collins are not serious in William Collins rejection of Elizabeth , Elizabeth shall choose to attribute William Collins rejection of Elizabeth to William Collins wish of increasing Elizabeth love by suspense , according to the usual practice of elegant females . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth do assure William Collins , William Collins , that Elizabeth have no pretensions whatever to that kind of elegance which consists in tormenting a respectable man . Elizabeth would rather be paid the compliment of being believed sincere . Elizabeth thank William Collins again and again for the honour William Collins have done Elizabeth in William Collins proposals , but to accept William Collins proposals is absolutely impossible . Elizabeth feelings in every respect forbid accept . Can Elizabeth speak plainer ? Do not consider Elizabeth now as an elegant female , intending to plague William Collins , but as a rational creature , speaking the truth from a rational creature , speaking the truth from heart . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth are uniformly charming ! ” cried William Collins , with an air of awkward gallantry ; “ and William Collins am persuaded that when sanctioned by the express authority of both Elizabeth excellent parents , William Collins proposals will not fail of being acceptable . ” 
 
  To such perseverance in wilful self - deception Elizabeth would make no reply , and immediately and in silence withdrew ; determined , if William Collins persisted in considering Elizabeth repeated refusals as flattering encouragement , to apply to Elizabeth father , whose negative might be uttered in such a manner as to be decisive , and whose behaviour at least could not be mistaken for the affectation and coquetry of an elegant female . 
 Chapter 
 
  William Collins was not left long to the silent contemplation of William Collins successful love ; for Mother , having dawdled about in the vestibule to watch for the end of the conference , no sooner saw Elizabeth open the door and with quick step pass Elizabeth towards the staircase , than Mother entered the breakfast - room , and congratulated both William Collins and Mother in warm terms on the happy prospect of both William Collins and Mother nearer connection . William Collins received and returned congratulated with equal pleasure , and then proceeded to relate the particulars of their interview , with the result of which William Collins trusted William Collins had every reason to be satisfied , since the refusal which William Collins cousin had steadfastly given William Collins would naturally flow from Elizabeth bashful modesty and the genuine delicacy of Elizabeth character . 
 
  This information , however , startled Mother ; Mother would have been glad to be equally satisfied that Mother daughter had meant to encourage William Collins by protesting against William Collins proposals , but Mother dared not believe meant , and could not help saying so . 
 
  “ But , depend upon it , William Collins , ” Mother added , “ that Elizabeth shall be brought to reason . Mother will speak to Elizabeth about it directly . Elizabeth is a very headstrong , foolish girl , and does not know Elizabeth own interest but Mother will make Elizabeth know Elizabeth own interest . ” 
 
  “ Pardon William Collins for interrupting Mother , Mother , ” cried William Collins ; “ but if Elizabeth is really headstrong and foolish , William Collins know not whether Elizabeth would altogether be a very desirable wife to a man in William Collins situation , who naturally looks for happiness in the marriage state . If therefore Elizabeth actually persists in rejecting William Collins suit , perhaps it were better not to force Elizabeth into accepting William Collins , because if liable to such defects of temper , Elizabeth could not contribute much to William Collins felicity . ” 
 
  “ William Collins , William Collins quite misunderstand Mother , ” said Mother , alarmed . “ Elizabeth is only headstrong in such matters as these . In everything else Elizabeth is as good - natured a girl as ever lived . Mother will go directly to Father , and we shall very soon settle it with Elizabeth , Mother am sure . ” 
 
  Mother would not give William Collins time to reply , but hurrying instantly to Father , called out as Mother entered the library , “ Oh ! Father , Father are wanted immediately ; we are all in an uproar . Father must come and make Elizabeth marry William Collins , for Elizabeth vows Elizabeth will not have William Collins , and if Father do not make haste William Collins will change William Collins mind and not have Elizabeth . ” 
 
  Father raised Father eyes from Father book as Elizabeth entered , and fixed Father eyes on Elizabeth face with a calm unconcern which was not in the least altered by Elizabeth communication . 
 
  “ Father have not the pleasure of understanding Elizabeth , ” said Father , when Elizabeth had finished Elizabeth communication . “ Of what are Elizabeth talking ? ” 
 
  “ Of William Collins and Elizabeth . Elizabeth declares Elizabeth will not have William Collins , and William Collins begins to say that William Collins will not have Elizabeth . ” 
 
  “ And what am Father to do on the occasion ? It seems an hopeless business . ” 
 
  “ Speak to Elizabeth about it Father . Tell Elizabeth that Father insist upon Elizabeth marrying William Collins . ” 
 
  “ Let Elizabeth be called down . Elizabeth shall hear Father opinion . ” 
 
  Mother rang the bell , and Elizabeth was summoned to the library . 
 
  “ Come here , Elizabeth , ” cried Elizabeth father as Elizabeth appeared . “ Father have sent for Elizabeth on an affair of importance . Father understand that William Collins has made Elizabeth an offer of marriage . Is an offer of marriage true ? ” Elizabeth replied that an offer of marriage was . “ Very well — and an offer of marriage Elizabeth have refused ? ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth have , Father . ” 
 
  “ Very well . We now come to the point . Elizabeth mother insists upon Elizabeth accepting an offer of marriage . Is it not so , Mother ? ” 
 
  “ Yes , or Elizabeth will never see Mother again . ” 
 
  “ An unhappy alternative is before Elizabeth , Elizabeth . From this day Elizabeth must be a stranger to one of Elizabeth parents . Elizabeth mother will never see Elizabeth again if Elizabeth do not marry William Collins , and Father will never see Elizabeth again if Elizabeth do . ” 
 
  Elizabeth could not but smile at such a conclusion of such a beginning , but Mother , who had persuaded Mother that Father regarded the affair as Mother wished , was excessively disappointed . 
 
  “ What do Father mean , Father , in talking this way ? Father promised Mother to insist upon Elizabeth marrying William Collins . ” 
 
  “ Father dear , ” replied Father , “ Father have two small favours to request . First , that Elizabeth will allow Father the free use of Father understanding on the present occasion ; and secondly , of Father room . Father shall be glad to have the library to Father as soon as may be . ” 
 
  Not yet , however , in spite of Mother disappointment in William Collins , did Mother give up the point . Mother talked to Elizabeth again and again ; coaxed and threatened Elizabeth by turns . Mother endeavoured to secure Jane in Mother interest ; but Jane , with all possible mildness , declined interfering ; and Elizabeth , sometimes with real earnestness , and sometimes with playful gaiety , replied to Mother attacks . Though Elizabeth manner varied , however , Elizabeth determination never did . 
 
  William Collins , meanwhile , was meditating in solitude on what had passed . William Collins thought too well of William Collins to comprehend on what motives William Collins cousin could refuse William Collins ; and though William Collins pride was hurt , William Collins suffered in no other way . William Collins regard for Elizabeth was quite imaginary ; and the possibility of Elizabeth deserving Elizabeth mother ’s reproach prevented William Collins feeling any regret . 
 
  While the family were in this confusion , Charlotte Lucas came to spend the day with the family . Charlotte Lucas was met in the vestibule by Lydia , who , flying to Charlotte Lucas , cried in a half whisper , “ Lydia am glad Charlotte Lucas are come , for there is such fun here ! What do Charlotte Lucas think has happened this morning ? William Collins has made an offer to Elizabeth , and Elizabeth will not have William Collins . ” 
 
  Charlotte Lucas hardly had time to answer , before they were joined by Kitty , who came to tell the same news ; and no sooner had they entered the breakfast - room , where Mother was alone , than Mother likewise began on the subject , calling on Charlotte Lucas for Charlotte Lucas compassion , and entreating Charlotte Lucas to persuade Charlotte Lucas friend Elizabeth to comply with the wishes of all Elizabeth family . “ Pray do , Charlotte Lucas , ” Mother added in a melancholy tone , “ for nobody is on Mother side , nobody takes part with Mother . Mother am cruelly used , nobody feels for Mother poor nerves . ” 
 
  Charlotte Lucas reply was spared by the entrance of Jane and Elizabeth . 
 
  “ Aye , there Elizabeth comes , ” continued Mother , “ looking as unconcerned as may be , and caring no more for the family than if the family were at York , provided Elizabeth can have Elizabeth own way . But Mother tell Elizabeth , Elizabeth — if Elizabeth take it into Elizabeth head to go on refusing every offer of marriage in this way , Elizabeth will never get a husband at all — and Mother am sure Mother do not know who is to maintain Elizabeth when Elizabeth father is dead . Mother shall not be able to keep Elizabeth — and so Mother warn Elizabeth . Mother have done with Elizabeth from this very day . Mother told Elizabeth in the library , Elizabeth know , that Mother should never speak to Elizabeth again , and Elizabeth will find Mother as good as Mother word . Mother have no pleasure in talking to undutiful children . Not that Mother have much pleasure , indeed , in talking to anybody . People who suffer as Mother do from nervous complaints can have no great inclination for talking . Nobody can tell what Mother suffer ! But it is always so . Those who do not complain are never pitied . ” 
 
  Elizabeth listened in silence to this effusion , sensible that any attempt to reason with Mother or soothe Mother would only increase the irritation . Mother talked on , therefore , without interruption from any of Elizabeth , till Elizabeth were joined by William Collins , who entered the room with an air more stately than usual , and on perceiving whom , Mother said to Elizabeth , “ Now , Mother do insist upon it , that Elizabeth , hold Elizabeth tongues , and let Mother and William Collins have a little conversation together . ” 
 
  Elizabeth passed quietly out of the room , Jane and Kitty followed , but Lydia stood Lydia ground , determined to hear all Lydia could ; and Charlotte Lucas , detained first by the civility of William Collins Collins , whose enquiries after Charlotte Lucas and all Charlotte Lucas family were very minute , and then by a little curiosity , satisfied Charlotte Lucas with walking to the window and pretending not to hear . In a doleful voice Mother began a little conversation : “ Oh ! William Collins ! ” 
 
  “ Father dear madam , ” replied William Collins , “ let us be for ever silent on this point . Far be it from William Collins , ” William Collins presently continued , in a voice that marked William Collins displeasure , “ to resent the behaviour of Elizabeth . Resignation to inevitable evils is the duty of us all ; the peculiar duty of a young man who has been so fortunate as William Collins have been in early preferment ; and William Collins trust William Collins am resigned . Perhaps not the less so from feeling a doubt of William Collins positive happiness had William Collins fair cousin honoured William Collins with Elizabeth hand ; for William Collins have often observed that resignation is never so perfect as when the blessing denied begins to lose somewhat of the blessing denied value in our estimation . Elizabeth will not , William Collins hope , consider William Collins as showing any disrespect to the family , William Collins dear madam , by thus withdrawing William Collins pretensions to Mother daughter ’s favour , without having paid Mother and Father the compliment of requesting Mother and Father to interpose Mother and Father authority in William Collins behalf . William Collins conduct may , William Collins fear , be objectionable in having accepted William Collins dismission from Mother daughter ’s lips instead of Mother own . But we are all liable to error . William Collins have certainly meant well through the whole affair . William Collins object has been to secure an amiable companion for William Collins , with due consideration for the advantage of all Mother family , and if William Collins manner has been at all reprehensible , William Collins here beg leave to apologise . ” 
 Chapter 
 
  The discussion of William Collins ’s offer was now nearly at an end , and Elizabeth had only to suffer from the uncomfortable feelings necessarily attending The discussion of William Collins ’s offer , and occasionally from some peevish allusions of Elizabeth mother . As for William Collins ’s William Collins ’s , William Collins ’s feelings were chiefly expressed , not by embarrassment or dejection , or by trying to avoid Elizabeth , but by stiffness of manner and resentful silence . William Collins ’s scarcely ever spoke to Elizabeth , and the assiduous attentions which William Collins ’s had been so sensible of William Collins ’s were transferred for the rest of the day to Miss Lucas , whose civility in listening to William Collins ’s was a seasonable relief to The whole party , and especially to Miss Lucas , whose civility in listening to William Collins ’s was a seasonable relief to The whole party , and especially to friend . 
 
  The morrow produced no abatement of Elizabeth mother ill - humour or ill health . William Collins ’s was also in the same state of angry pride . Elizabeth had hoped that William Collins ’s resentment might shorten William Collins ’s visit , but William Collins ’s plan did not appear in the least affected by William Collins ’s resentment . William Collins ’s was always to have gone on Saturday , and to Saturday William Collins ’s meant to stay . 
 
  After breakfast , the girls walked to Meryton to enquire if Charlie were returned , and to lament over William Collins ’s absence from the Netherfield ball . William Collins ’s joined the girls on the girls entering Meryton , and attended the girls to the girls aunt ’s where William Collins ’s regret and vexation , and the concern of everybody , was well talked over . To Elizabeth , however , William Collins ’s voluntarily acknowledged that the necessity of William Collins ’s absence had been self - imposed . 
 
  “ William Collins ’s found , ” said William Collins ’s , “ as the time drew near that William Collins ’s had better not meet Fitzwilliam ; that to be in the same room , the same party with Fitzwilliam for so many hours together , might be more than William Collins ’s could bear , and that scenes might arise unpleasant to more than William Collins ’s . ” 
 
  Elizabeth highly approved William Collins ’s forbearance , and they had leisure for a full discussion of William Collins ’s forbearance , and for all the commendation which they civilly bestowed on each other , as George and another officer walked back with they to Longbourn , and during the walk George particularly attended to Elizabeth . George accompanying them was a double advantage ; Elizabeth felt all the compliment George accompanying them offered to Elizabeth , and George accompanying them was most acceptable as an occasion of introducing George to Elizabeth father and mother . 
 
  Soon after them return , a letter was delivered to Miss Bennet ; a letter came from Netherfield . The envelope contained a sheet of elegant , little , hot - pressed paper , well covered with a lady ’s fair , flowing hand ; and Elizabeth saw Miss Bennet countenance change as Miss Bennet read a letter , and saw Miss Bennet dwelling intently on some particular passages . Miss Bennet recollected Miss Bennet soon , and putting a letter away , tried to join with Miss Bennet usual cheerfulness in the general conversation ; but Elizabeth felt an anxiety on the subject which drew off Elizabeth attention even from George ; and no sooner had George and George companion taken leave , than a glance from Miss Bennet invited Elizabeth to follow Miss Bennet up stairs . When them had gained them own room , Miss Bennet , taking out a letter , said : 
 
  “ a letter is from a lady ’s ; what a letter contains has surprised Miss Bennet a good deal . The whole party have left Netherfield by this time , and are on The whole party way to town — and without any intention of coming back again . Elizabeth shall hear what a lady ’s says . ” 
 
  Miss Bennet then read the first sentence aloud , which comprised the information of The whole party having just resolved to follow The whole party brother to town directly , and of The whole party meaning to dine in Grosvenor Street , where Mr. Hurst had a house . The next was in these words : “ Miss Bennet do not pretend to regret anything Miss Bennet shall leave in Hertfordshire , except Elizabeth society , Elizabeth ; but we will hope , at some future period , to enjoy many returns of that delightful intercourse we have known , and in the meanwhile may lessen the pain of separation by a very frequent and most unreserved correspondence . Miss Bennet depend on Elizabeth for that . ” To these highflown expressions Elizabeth listened with all the insensibility of distrust ; and though the suddenness of The whole party removal surprised Elizabeth , Elizabeth saw nothing in it really to lament ; it was not to be supposed that The whole party absence from Netherfield would prevent Charlie being there ; and as to the loss of The whole party society , Elizabeth was persuaded that Miss Bennet must cease to regard Elizabeth society , in the enjoyment of Miss Bennet . 
 
  “ It is unlucky , ” said Miss Bennet , after a short pause , “ that Elizabeth should not be able to see Elizabeth friends before Elizabeth friends leave the country . But may we not hope that the period of future happiness to which a lady ’s looks forward may arrive earlier than a lady ’s is aware , and that the delightful intercourse Elizabeth have known as friends will be renewed with yet greater satisfaction as sisters ? Charlie will not be detained in London by them . ” 
 
  “ a lady ’s decidedly says that none of The whole party will return into Hertfordshire this winter . Miss Bennet will read it to Elizabeth : ” 
 
  “ When The whole party brother left us yesterday , The whole party brother imagined that the business which took The whole party brother to London might be concluded in three or four days ; but as us are certain the business which took The whole party brother to London can not be so , and at the same time convinced that when Charlie gets to town Charlie will be in no hurry to leave it again , us have determined on following Charlie thither , that Charlie may not be obliged to spend Charlie vacant hours in a comfortless hotel . Many of Miss Bennet acquaintances are already there for the winter ; Miss Bennet wish that Miss Bennet could hear that Elizabeth , Elizabeth , had any intention of making one of Many of Miss Bennet acquaintances — but of making Miss Bennet despair . Miss Bennet sincerely hope Elizabeth Christmas in Hertfordshire may abound in the gaieties which that season generally brings , and that Elizabeth beaux will be so numerous as to prevent Elizabeth feeling the loss of the three of whom we shall deprive Elizabeth . ” 
 
  “ It is evident by this , ” added Miss Bennet , “ that The whole party brother comes back no more this winter . ” 
 
  “ It is only evident that a lady ’s does not mean that The whole party brother should . ” 
 
  “ Why will Miss Bennet think so ? It must be a lady ’s own doing . a lady ’s is a lady ’s own master . But Elizabeth do not know all . Miss Bennet will read Elizabeth the passage which particularly hurts Miss Bennet . Miss Bennet will have no reserves from Elizabeth . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam is impatient to see Fitzwilliam sister ; and , to confess the truth , we are scarcely less eager to meet Fitzwilliam sister again . Miss Bennet really do not think Fitzwilliam sister has Fitzwilliam sister equal for beauty , elegance , and accomplishments ; and the affection Fitzwilliam sister inspires in Louisa and Miss Bennet is heightened into something still more interesting , from the hope Louisa and Miss Bennet dare entertain of Fitzwilliam sister being hereafter Louisa and Miss Bennet sister . Miss Bennet do not know whether Miss Bennet ever before mentioned to Elizabeth Miss Bennet feelings on this subject ; but Miss Bennet will not leave the country without confiding Miss Bennet feelings on this subject , and Miss Bennet trust Elizabeth will not esteem Miss Bennet feelings on this subject unreasonable . Miss Bennet brother admires Fitzwilliam sister greatly already ; The whole party brother will have frequent opportunity now of seeing Fitzwilliam sister on the most intimate footing ; Fitzwilliam sister relations all wish the connection as much as The whole party brother own ; and a sister ’s partiality is not misleading Miss Bennet , Miss Bennet think , when Miss Bennet call Charlie most capable of engaging any woman ’s heart . With all these circumstances to favour an attachment , and nothing to prevent an attachment , am Miss Bennet wrong , Elizabeth , in indulging the hope of an event which will secure the happiness of so many ? ” 
 
  “ What do Elizabeth think of the passage which particularly hurts Miss Bennet , Miss Bennet dear Elizabeth ? ” said Miss Bennet as Miss Bennet finished the passage which particularly hurts Miss Bennet . “ Is the passage which particularly hurts Miss Bennet not clear enough ? Does the passage which particularly hurts Miss Bennet not expressly declare that a lady ’s neither expects nor wishes Miss Bennet to be a lady ’s sister ; that a lady ’s is perfectly convinced of The whole party brother indifference ; and that if a lady ’s suspects the nature of Miss Bennet feelings for The whole party brother , a lady ’s means ( most kindly ! ) to put Miss Bennet on Miss Bennet guard ? Can there be any other opinion on this subject ? ” 
 
  “ Yes , there can ; for Miss Bennet is totally different . Will Elizabeth hear it ? ” 
 
  Elizabeth Most willingly . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth shall have it in a few words . a lady ’s sees that a lady ’s brother is in love with Elizabeth , and wants The whole party brother to marry Fitzwilliam sister . a lady ’s follows The whole party brother to town in hope of keeping The whole party brother there , and tries to persuade Elizabeth that The whole party brother does not care about Elizabeth . ” 
 
  Miss Bennet shook Miss Bennet head . 
 
  “ Indeed , Elizabeth , Elizabeth ought to believe Miss Bennet . No one who has ever seen Elizabeth together can doubt The whole party brother affection . a lady ’s , Miss Bennet am sure , can not . a lady ’s is not such a simpleton . Could a lady ’s have seen half as much love in Fitzwilliam for a lady ’s , a lady ’s would have ordered a lady ’s wedding clothes . But the case is this : We are not rich enough or grand enough for them ; and a lady ’s is the more anxious to get Fitzwilliam sister for a lady ’s brother , from the notion that when there has been one intermarriage , a lady ’s may have less trouble in achieving a second ; in which there is certainly some ingenuity , and Miss Bennet dare say it would succeed , if Cathleen were out of the way . But , Miss Bennet dearest Jane , Elizabeth can not seriously imagine that because a lady ’s tells Elizabeth The whole party brother greatly admires Fitzwilliam sister , The whole party brother is in the smallest degree less sensible of Elizabeth merit than when The whole party brother took leave of Elizabeth on Tuesday , or that it will be in a lady ’s power to persuade The whole party brother that , instead of being in love with Elizabeth , The whole party brother is very much in love with a lady ’s friend . ” 
 
  “ If we thought alike of a lady ’s , ” replied Miss Bennet , “ Elizabeth representation of all this might make Miss Bennet quite easy . But Miss Bennet know the foundation is unjust . a lady ’s is incapable of wilfully deceiving anyone ; and all that Miss Bennet can hope in this case is that a lady ’s is deceiving a lady ’s . ” 
 
  “ That is right . Elizabeth could not have started a more happy idea , since Elizabeth will not take comfort in Miss Bennet . Believe a lady ’s to be deceived , by all means . Elizabeth have now done Elizabeth duty by a lady ’s , and must fret no longer . ” 
 
  “ But , Miss Bennet , can Miss Bennet be happy , even supposing the best , in accepting a man whose sisters and friends are all wishing him to marry elsewhere ? ” 
 
  “ Miss Bennet must decide for Miss Bennet , ” said Elizabeth ; “ and if , upon mature deliberation , Miss Bennet find that the misery of disobliging The whole party brother two sisters is more than equivalent to the happiness of being The whole party brother wife , Elizabeth advise Miss Bennet by all means to refuse The whole party brother . ” 
 
  “ How can Elizabeth talk so ? ” said Miss Bennet , faintly smiling . “ Elizabeth must know that though Miss Bennet should be exceedingly grieved at The whole party brother two sisters disapprobation , Miss Bennet could not hesitate . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth did not think Miss Bennet would ; and that being the case , Elizabeth can not consider Miss Bennet situation with much compassion . ” 
 
  “ But if The whole party brother returns no more this winter , Miss Bennet choice will never be required . A thousand things may arise in six months ! ” 
 
  The idea of The whole party brother returning no more Elizabeth treated with the utmost contempt . The idea of The whole party brother returning no more appeared to Elizabeth merely the suggestion of a lady ’s interested wishes , and Elizabeth could not for a moment suppose that those wishes , however openly or artfully spoken , could influence a young man so totally independent of everyone . 
 
  Elizabeth represented to Miss Bennet as forcibly as possible what Elizabeth felt on this subject , and had soon the pleasure of seeing its happy effect . Miss Bennet temper was not desponding , and Miss Bennet was gradually led to hope , though the diffidence of affection sometimes overcame the hope , that Charlie would return to Netherfield and answer every wish of Miss Bennet heart . 
 
  They agreed that Elizabeth mother should only hear of the departure of the family , without being alarmed on the score of The whole party brother conduct ; but even this partial communication gave Elizabeth mother a great deal of concern , and Elizabeth mother bewailed it as exceedingly unlucky that the girls should happen to go away just as the girls were all getting so intimate together . After lamenting it , however , at some length , Elizabeth mother had the consolation that Charlie would be soon down again and soon dining at Longbourn , and the conclusion of all was the comfortable declaration , that though George had been invited only to a family dinner , Elizabeth mother would take care to have two full courses . 
 Chapter 
 
  The Bennets were engaged to dine with the Lucases and again during the chief of the day was Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins . Elizabeth took an opportunity of thanking Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins . “ It keeps William Collins in good humour , ” said Elizabeth , “ and Elizabeth am more obliged to Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins than Elizabeth can express . ” Charlotte assured Elizabeth of Charlotte satisfaction in being useful , and that being amply repaid Charlotte for the little sacrifice of Charlotte time . This was very amiable , but Charlotte ’s kindness extended farther than Elizabeth had any conception of ; This object was nothing else than to secure Elizabeth from any return of William Collins ’s addresses , by engaging William Collins ’s addresses towards Charlotte . Such was Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins scheme ; and appearances were so favourable , that when both William Collins and Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins parted at night , Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins would have felt almost secure of success if William Collins had not been to leave Hertfordshire so very soon . But here Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins did injustice to the fire and independence of William Collins character , for the fire and independence of William Collins character led William Collins to escape out of Longbourn House the next morning with admirable slyness , and hasten to Lucas Lodge to throw William Collins at Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins feet . William Collins was anxious to avoid the notice of William Collins cousins , from a conviction that if William Collins cousins saw William Collins depart , William Collins cousins could not fail to conjecture William Collins design , and William Collins was not willing to have the attempt known till the attempt success might be known likewise ; for though feeling almost secure , and with reason , for Charlotte had been tolerably encouraging , William Collins was comparatively diffident since the adventure of Wednesday . William Collins reception , however , was of the most flattering kind . Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins perceived William Collins from an upper window as William Collins walked towards Longbourn House , and instantly set out to meet William Collins accidentally in the lane . But little had Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins dared to hope that so much love and eloquence awaited Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins there . 
 
  In as short a time as William Collins ’s long speeches would allow , everything was settled between both William Collins and Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins to the satisfaction of both William Collins and Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins ; and as both William Collins and Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins entered Longbourn House William Collins earnestly entreated Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins to name the day that was to make William Collins the happiest of men ; and though such a solicitation must be waived for the present , Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins felt no inclination to trifle with William Collins happiness . The stupidity with which William Collins was favoured by nature must guard William Collins courtship from any charm that could make a woman wish for its continuance ; and Miss Lucas , who accepted William Collins solely from the pure and disinterested desire of an establishment , cared not how soon an establishment were gained . 
 
  William Collins and Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins were speedily applied to for William Collins and Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins consent ; and William Collins and Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins consent was bestowed with a most joyful alacrity . William Collins ’s present circumstances made William Collins a most eligible match for William Collins and Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins daughter , to whom William Collins and Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins could give little fortune ; and William Collins prospects of future wealth were exceedingly fair . Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins began directly to calculate , with more interest than the matter had ever excited before , how many years longer William Collins was likely to live ; and William Collins gave it as William Collins decided opinion , that whenever William Collins should be in possession of the Longbourn estate , it would be highly expedient that both William Collins and Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins should make both William Collins and Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins appearance at St. James ’s . The whole family , in short , were properly overjoyed on the occasion . The younger girls formed hopes of coming out a year or two sooner than The younger girls might otherwise have done ; and the boys were relieved from the boys apprehension of Charlotte ’s dying an old maid . Charlotte Charlotte was tolerably composed . Charlotte had gained Charlotte point , and had time to consider of Charlotte point . Charlotte reflections were in general satisfactory . William Collins , to be sure , was neither sensible nor agreeable ; William Collins society was irksome , and William Collins attachment to Charlotte must be imaginary . But still William Collins would be Charlotte husband . Without thinking highly either of men or matrimony , marriage had always been Charlotte object ; marriage was the only provision for well - educated young women of small fortune , and however uncertain of giving happiness , must be well - educated young women of small fortune pleasantest preservative from want . This preservative Charlotte had now obtained ; and at the age of twenty - seven , without having ever been handsome , Charlotte felt all the good luck of it . The least agreeable circumstance in the business was the surprise the business must occasion to Elizabeth , whose friendship Charlotte valued beyond that of any other person . Elizabeth would wonder , and probably would blame Charlotte ; and though Elizabeth resolution was not to be shaken , Elizabeth feelings must be hurt by such a disapprobation . Charlotte resolved to give Elizabeth the information Charlotte , and therefore charged William Collins , when William Collins returned to Longbourn to dinner , to drop no hint of what had passed before any of the family . A promise of secrecy was of course very dutifully given , but A promise of secrecy could not be kept without difficulty ; for the curiosity excited by William Collins long absence burst forth in such very direct questions on William Collins return as required some ingenuity to evade , and William Collins was at the same time exercising great self - denial , for William Collins was longing to publish William Collins prosperous love . 
 
  As William Collins was to begin William Collins journey too early on the morrow to see any of the family , the ceremony of leave - taking was performed when the ladies moved for the night ; and Mother , with great politeness and cordiality , said how happy the ladies should be to see William Collins at Longbourn again , whenever William Collins engagements might allow William Collins to visit the ladies . 
 
  “ William Collins dear madam , ” William Collins replied , “ this invitation is particularly gratifying , because this invitation is what William Collins have been hoping to receive ; and Mother may be very certain that William Collins shall avail William Collins of this invitation as soon as possible . ” 
 
  the ladies were all astonished ; and Father , who could by no means wish for so speedy a return , immediately said : 
 
  “ But is there not danger of Cathleen ’s disapprobation here , William Collins ? William Collins had better neglect William Collins relations than run the risk of offending Cathleen ’s . ” 
 
  “ Father , who could by no means wish for so speedy a return , , ” replied William Collins , “ William Collins am particularly obliged to Father , who could by no means wish for so speedy a return , for this friendly caution , and Father , who could by no means wish for so speedy a return , may depend upon William Collins not taking so material a step without Cathleen ’s concurrence . ” 
 
  “ William Collins can not be too much upon William Collins guard . Risk anything rather than Cathleen ’s displeasure ; and if William Collins find Cathleen ’s displeasure likely to be raised by William Collins coming to the family again , which Father , who could by no means wish for so speedy a return , should think exceedingly probable , stay quietly at home , and be satisfied that the family shall take no offence . ” 
 
  “ Believe William Collins , Father , who could by no means wish for so speedy a return , , William Collins gratitude is warmly excited by such affectionate attention ; and depend upon it , Father , who could by no means wish for so speedy a return , will speedily receive from William Collins a letter of thanks for this , and for every other mark of Father , who could by no means wish for so speedy a return , regard during William Collins stay in Hertfordshire . As for William Collins fair cousins , though William Collins absence may not be long enough to render William Collins absence necessary , William Collins shall now take the liberty of wishing William Collins fair cousins health and happiness , not excepting William Collins cousin Elizabeth . ” 
 
  With proper civilities the ladies then withdrew ; the ladies equally surprised that William Collins meditated a quick return . Mother wished to understand by it that William Collins thought of paying William Collins addresses to one of Mother younger girls , and Mary might have been prevailed on to accept William Collins . Mother rated William Collins abilities much higher than any of the others ; there was a solidity in William Collins reflections which often struck Mother , and though by no means so clever as Mother , Mother thought that if encouraged to read and improve William Collins by such an example as Mother , William Collins might become a very agreeable companion . But on the following morning , every hope of this kind was done away . Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins called soon after breakfast , and in a private conference with Elizabeth related the event of the day before . 
 
  The possibility of William Collins ’s fancying William Collins in love with Elizabeth had once occurred to Elizabeth within the last day or two ; but that Charlotte could encourage William Collins seemed almost as far from possibility as Elizabeth could encourage William Collins Elizabeth , and Elizabeth astonishment was consequently so great as to overcome at first the bounds of decorum , and Elizabeth could not help crying out : 
 
  “ Engaged to William Collins ! Elizabeth dear Charlotte — impossible ! ” 
 
  The steady countenance which Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins had commanded in telling Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins story , gave way to a momentary confusion here on receiving so direct a reproach ; though , as it was no more than Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins expected , Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins soon regained Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins composure , and calmly replied : 
 
  “ Why should Elizabeth be surprised , Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins dear Elizabeth ? Do Elizabeth think it incredible that William Collins should be able to procure any woman ’s good opinion , because William Collins was not so happy as to succeed with Elizabeth ? ” 
 
  But Elizabeth had now recollected Elizabeth , and making a strong effort for it , was able to assure with tolerable firmness that the prospect of both William Collins and Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins relationship was highly grateful to Elizabeth , and that Elizabeth wished Elizabeth all imaginable happiness . 
 
  “ Charlotte see what Elizabeth are feeling , ” replied Charlotte . “ Elizabeth must be surprised , very much surprised — so lately as William Collins was wishing to marry Elizabeth . But when Elizabeth have had time to think it over , Charlotte hope Elizabeth will be satisfied with what Charlotte have done . Charlotte am not romantic , Father , who could by no means wish for so speedy a return , know ; Charlotte never was . Charlotte ask only a comfortable home ; and considering William Collins ’s character , connection , and situation in life , Charlotte am convinced that Charlotte chance of happiness with William Collins is as fair as most people can boast on entering the marriage state . ” 
 
  Elizabeth quietly answered “ Undoubtedly ; ” and after an awkward pause , both William Collins and Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins returned to the rest of the family . Charlotte did not stay much longer , and Elizabeth was then left to reflect on what Elizabeth had heard . It was a long time before Elizabeth became at all reconciled to the idea of so unsuitable a match . The strangeness of William Collins ’s making two offers of marriage within three days was nothing in comparison of William Collins being now accepted . Elizabeth had always felt that Charlotte ’s opinion of matrimony was not exactly like Elizabeth own , but Elizabeth had not supposed it to be possible that , when called into action , Charlotte would have sacrificed every better feeling to worldly advantage . Charlotte the wife of William Collins was a most humiliating picture ! And to the pang of a friend disgracing a friend disgracing and sunk in a friend disgracing esteem , was added the distressing conviction that it was impossible for a friend disgracing to be tolerably happy in the lot a friend disgracing had chosen . 
 Chapter 
 
  Elizabeth was sitting with Elizabeth mother and sisters , reflecting on what Elizabeth had heard , and doubting whether Elizabeth was authorised to mention it , when Sir William Lucas Sir William Lucas appeared , sent by Elizabeth , to announce Elizabeth engagement to the family . With many compliments to Elizabeth mother and sisters , and much self - gratulation on the prospect of a connection between the houses , Sir William Lucas unfolded the matter — to an audience not merely wondering , but incredulous ; for Mother , with more perseverance than politeness , protested Sir William Lucas must be entirely mistaken ; and Lydia , always unguarded and often uncivil , boisterously exclaimed : 
 
  “ Good Lord ! Sir William Lucas , how can Sir William Lucas tell such a story ? Do not Sir William Lucas know that William Collins wants to marry Elizabeth ? ” 
 
  Nothing less than the complaisance of a courtier could have borne without anger such treatment ; but Sir William Lucas good breeding carried Sir William Lucas through it all ; and though Sir William Lucas begged leave to be positive as to the truth of Sir William Lucas information , Sir William Lucas listened to all their impertinence with the most forbearing courtesy . 
 
  Elizabeth , feeling it incumbent on Elizabeth to relieve Sir William Lucas from so unpleasant a situation , now put Elizabeth forward to confirm Sir William Lucas account , by mentioning Elizabeth prior knowledge of Sir William Lucas account from Charlotte Charlotte ; and endeavoured to put a stop to the exclamations of Elizabeth mother and sisters by the earnestness of Elizabeth congratulations to Sir William Lucas , in which Elizabeth was readily joined by Jane , and by making a variety of remarks on the happiness that might be expected from the match , the excellent character of William Collins , and the convenient distance of Hunsford from London . 
 
  Mother was in fact too much overpowered to say a great deal while Sir William Lucas remained ; but no sooner had Sir William Lucas left Elizabeth mother and sisters than Mother feelings found a rapid vent . In the first place , Mother persisted in disbelieving the whole of the matter ; secondly , Mother was very sure that William Collins had been taken in ; thirdly , Mother trusted that they would never be happy together ; and fourthly , that the match might be broken off . Two inferences , however , were plainly deduced from the whole of the matter : one , that Elizabeth was the real cause of the mischief ; and the other that Mother Mother had been barbarously misused by them all ; and on these two points Mother principally dwelt during the rest of the day . Nothing could console and nothing could appease Mother . Nor did the day wear out Mother resentment . A week elapsed before Mother could see Elizabeth without scolding Elizabeth , a month passed away before Mother could speak to Sir William Lucas or Lady Lucas without being rude , and many months were gone before Mother could at all forgive Elizabeth . 
 
  Father ’s emotions were much more tranquil on the occasion , and such as Father ’s did experience Father ’s pronounced to be of a most agreeable sort ; for it gratified Father ’s , Father ’s said , to discover that Charlotte Lucas , whom Father ’s had been used to think tolerably sensible , was as foolish as Father ’s wife , and more foolish than Elizabeth ! 
 
  Jane confessed Jane a little surprised at the match ; but Jane said less of Jane astonishment than of Jane earnest desire for they happiness ; nor could Elizabeth persuade Jane to consider the match as improbable . Kitty and Lydia were far from envying Lady Lucas , for William Collins was only a clergyman ; and the match affected Kitty and Lydia in no other way than as a piece of news to spread at Meryton . 
 
  Lady Lucas could not be insensible of triumph on being able to retort on Mother the comfort of having a daughter well married ; and Lady Lucas called at Longbourn rather oftener than usual to say how happy Lady Lucas was , though Mother ’s sour looks and ill - natured remarks might have been enough to drive happiness away . 
 
  Between Elizabeth and Charlotte there was a restraint which kept Elizabeth and Charlotte mutually silent on the subject ; and Elizabeth felt persuaded that no real confidence could ever subsist between Elizabeth and Charlotte again . Elizabeth disappointment in Charlotte made Elizabeth turn with fonder regard to Elizabeth sister , of whose rectitude and delicacy Elizabeth was sure Elizabeth opinion could never be shaken , and for whose happiness Elizabeth grew daily more anxious , as Charles had now been gone a week and nothing more was heard of Charles return . 
 
  Jane had sent Caroline an early answer to Jane letter , and was counting the days till Jane might reasonably hope to hear again . The promised letter of thanks from William Collins arrived on Tuesday , addressed to Father ’s , and written with all the solemnity of gratitude which a twelvemonth ’s abode in the family might have prompted . After discharging Sir William Lucas conscience on that head , Sir William Lucas proceeded to inform Elizabeth mother and sisters , with many rapturous expressions , of Sir William Lucas happiness in having obtained the affection of Elizabeth mother and sisters amiable neighbour , Miss Lucas , and then explained that it was merely with the view of enjoying Lady Lucas society that Sir William Lucas had been so ready to close with Elizabeth mother and sisters kind wish of seeing William Collins again at Longbourn , whither Sir William Lucas hoped to be able to return on Monday fortnight ; for Cathleen , Sir William Lucas added , so heartily approved Sir William Lucas marriage , that Cathleen wished Sir William Lucas marriage to take place as soon as possible , which Sir William Lucas trusted would be an unanswerable argument with Sir William Lucas amiable Charlotte to name an early day for making Sir William Lucas the happiest of men . 
 
  William Collins ’s return into Hertfordshire was no longer a matter of pleasure to Mother . On the contrary , Mother was as much disposed to complain of William Collins ’s return into Hertfordshire as Mother husband . It was very strange that William Collins should come to Longbourn instead of to Lucas Lodge ; come was also very inconvenient and exceedingly troublesome . Mother hated having visitors in the house while Mother health was so indifferent , and lovers were of all people the most disagreeable . Such were the gentle murmurs of Mother , and the gentle murmurs of Mother gave way only to the greater distress of Charles ’s continued absence . 
 
  Neither Jane nor Elizabeth were comfortable on Charles ’s continued absence . Day after day passed away without bringing any other tidings of Charles than the report which shortly prevailed in Meryton of Charles coming no more to Netherfield the whole winter ; the report which shortly prevailed in Meryton of Charles coming no more to Netherfield the whole winter . 
 
  Even Elizabeth began to fear — not that Charles was indifferent — but that Charles sisters would be successful in keeping Charles away . Unwilling as Elizabeth was to admit an idea so destructive of Jane ’s happiness , and so dishonorable to the stability of Charles , Elizabeth could not prevent an idea so destructive of Jane ’s happiness , and so dishonorable to the stability of Charles frequently occurring . The united efforts of Charles two unfeeling sisters and of Charles overpowering friend , assisted by the attractions of Georgiana and the amusements of London might be too much , Elizabeth feared , for the strength of Charles attachment . 
 
  As for Jane , Jane anxiety under this suspense was , of course , more painful than Elizabeth ’s , but whatever Jane felt Jane was desirous of concealing , and between Jane and Elizabeth , therefore , Charles ’s continued absence was never alluded to . But as no such delicacy restrained Jane mother , an hour seldom passed in which Mother did not talk of Charles , express Mother impatience for Charles arrival , or even require Jane to confess that if Charles did not come back Mother would think Mother very ill used . It needed all Jane ’s steady mildness to bear these attacks with tolerable tranquillity . 
 
  William Collins returned most punctually on Monday fortnight , but William Collins reception at Longbourn was not quite so gracious as it had been on William Collins first introduction . William Collins was too happy , however , to need much attention ; and luckily for the others , the business of love - making relieved the others from a great deal of William Collins company . The chief of every day was spent by William Collins at Lucas Lodge , and William Collins sometimes returned to Longbourn only in time to make an apology for William Collins absence before the family went to bed . 
 
  Mother was really in a most pitiable state . The very mention of anything concerning the match threw Mother into an agony of ill - humour , and wherever Mother went Mother was sure of hearing the match talked of . The sight of Lady Lucas was odious to Mother . As Mother successor in the house , Mother regarded Lady Lucas with jealous abhorrence . Whenever Charlotte came to see the family , Mother concluded Charlotte to be anticipating the hour of possession ; and whenever Mother spoke in a low voice to William Collins , was convinced that they were talking of the Longbourn estate , and resolving to turn Mother and Mother daughters out of the house , as soon as Father ’s were dead . Mother complained bitterly of all this to Father ’s . 
 
  “ Indeed , Father ’s , ” said Mother , “ it is very hard to think that Charlotte Lucas should ever be mistress of the house , that Mother should be forced to make way for Charlotte , and live to see Charlotte take Charlotte place in the house ! ” 
 
  “ Father ’s dear , do not give way to such gloomy thoughts . Let they hope for better things . Let they flatter they that Father ’s may be the survivor . ” 
 
  This was not very consoling to Mother , and therefore , instead of making any answer , Mother went on as before . 
 
  “ Mother can not bear to think that they should have the Longbourn estate . If it was not for the entail , Mother should not mind it . ” 
 
  “ What should not Mother mind ? ” 
 
  “ Mother should not mind anything at all . ” 
 
  “ Let they be thankful that Mother are preserved from a state of such insensibility . ” 
 
  “ Mother never can be thankful , Father ’s , for anything about the entail . How anyone could have the conscience to entail away an estate from one ’s own daughters , Mother can not understand ; and all for the sake of William Collins too ! Why should William Collins have an estate more than anybody else ? ” 
 
  “ Father ’s leave it to Mother to determine , ” said Father ’s . 
 Chapter 
 
  Caroline ’s letter arrived , and put an end to doubt . The very first sentence conveyed the assurance of their being all settled in London for the winter , and concluded with Caroline ’s brother ’s regret at not having had time to pay Caroline ’s brother ’s respects to Caroline ’s brother ’s friends in Hertfordshire before Caroline ’s brother ’s left the country . 
 
  Hope was over , entirely over ; and when Jane could attend to the rest of Caroline ’s letter , Jane found little , except the professed affection of Caroline ’s , that could give Jane any comfort . Georgiana ’s praise occupied the chief of it . Georgiana ’s many attractions were again dwelt on , and Caroline ’s boasted joyfully of their increasing intimacy , and ventured to predict the accomplishment of the wishes which had been unfolded in Caroline ’s former letter . Caroline ’s wrote also with great pleasure of Caroline ’s brother ’s being an inmate of Fitzwilliam ’s house , and mentioned with raptures some plans of Fitzwilliam ’s with regard to new furniture . 
 
  Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this , heard all this in silent indignation . Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this heart was divided between concern for Caroline ’s , and resentment against all others . To Caroline ’s assertion of Caroline ’s brother ’s being partial to Georgiana ’s Caroline ’s paid no credit . That Caroline ’s brother ’s was really fond of Jane , Caroline ’s doubted no more than Caroline ’s had ever done ; and much as Caroline ’s had always been disposed to like Caroline ’s brother ’s , Caroline ’s could not think without anger , hardly without contempt , on that easiness of temper , that want of proper resolution , which now made Caroline ’s brother ’s the slave of Caroline ’s brother ’s designing friends , and led Caroline ’s brother ’s to sacrifice of Caroline ’s brother ’s own happiness to the caprice of Caroline ’s brother ’s designing friends inclination . Had Caroline ’s brother ’s own happiness , however , been the only sacrifice , Caroline ’s brother ’s might have been allowed to sport with Caroline ’s brother ’s own happiness in whatever manner Caroline ’s brother ’s thought best , but Caroline ’s was involved in it , as Caroline ’s thought Caroline ’s brother ’s must be sensible Caroline ’s brother ’s . It was a subject , in short , on which reflection would be long indulged , and must be unavailing . Caroline ’s could think of nothing else ; and yet whether Charles ’s regard had really died away , or were suppressed by Charles ’s friends ’ interference ; whether Charles ’s had been aware of Jane ’s attachment , or whether Jane ’s attachment had escaped Charles ’s observation ; whatever were the case , though Caroline ’s opinion of Charles ’s must be materially affected by the difference , Caroline ’s situation remained the same , Caroline ’s peace equally wounded . 
 
  A day or two passed before Jane had courage to speak of Jane feelings to Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this ; but at last , on Mother ’s leaving their together , after a longer irritation than usual about Netherfield and Netherfield master , Jane could not help saying : 
 
  “ Oh , that Jane dear mother had more command over Mother ’s ! Mother ’s can have no idea of the pain Mother ’s gives Jane by Mother ’s continual reflections on Netherfield master . But Jane will not repine . It can not last long . Netherfield master will be forgot , and we shall all be as we were before . ” 
 
  Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this looked at Jane with incredulous solicitude , but said nothing . 
 
  “ Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this doubt Jane , ” cried Jane , slightly colouring ; “ indeed , Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this have no reason . Netherfield master may live in Jane memory as the most amiable man of Jane acquaintance , but live is all . Jane have nothing either to hope or fear , and nothing to reproach Netherfield master with . Thank God ! Jane have not that pain . A little time , therefore — Jane shall certainly try to get the better . ” 
 
  With a stronger voice Jane soon added , “ Jane have this comfort immediately , that it has not been more than an error of fancy on Jane side , and that it has done no harm to anyone but Jane . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this dear Jane ! ” exclaimed Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this , “ Jane are too good . Jane sweetness and disinterestedness are really angelic ; Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this do not know what to say to Jane . Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this feel as if Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this had never done Jane justice , or loved Jane as Jane deserve . ” 
 
  Miss Bennet eagerly disclaimed all extraordinary merit , and threw back the praise on Miss Bennet sister ’s warm affection . 
 
  “ Nay , ” said Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this , “ this is not fair . Miss Bennet wish to think all the world respectable , and are hurt if Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this speak ill of anybody . Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this only want to think Miss Bennet perfect , and Miss Bennet set Miss Bennet against think . Do not be afraid of Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this running into any excess , of Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this encroaching on Miss Bennet privilege of universal good - will . Miss Bennet need not . There are few people whom Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this really love , and still fewer of whom Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this think well . The more Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this see of the world , the more am Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this dissatisfied with the world ; and every day confirms Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this belief of the inconsistency of all human characters , and of the little dependence that can be placed on the appearance of merit or sense . Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this have met with two instances lately , one Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this will not mention ; the other is Charlotte ’s marriage . It is unaccountable ! In every view it is unaccountable ! ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this dear Elizabeth , do not give way to such feelings as these . such feelings as these will ruin Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this happiness . Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this do not make allowance enough for difference of situation and temper . Consider William Collins ’s respectability , and Charlotte ’s steady , prudent character . Remember that Charlotte ’s is one of a large family ; that as to fortune , William Collins ’s is a most eligible match ; and be ready to believe , for everybody ’s sake , that Charlotte ’s may feel something like regard and esteem for William Collins ’s . ” 
 
  “ To oblige Miss Bennet , Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this would try to believe almost anything , but no one else could be benefited by such a belief as this ; for were Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this persuaded that Charlotte ’s had any regard for William Collins ’s , Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this should only think worse of Charlotte ’s understanding than Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this now do of Charlotte ’s heart . Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this dear Jane , William Collins ’s is a conceited , pompous , narrow - minded , silly man ; Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this dear Jane know William Collins ’s is , as well as Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this do ; and Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this dear Jane must feel , as well as Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this do , that Charlotte ’s can not have a proper way of thinking . Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this dear Jane shall not defend Charlotte ’s , though it is Charlotte ’s . Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this dear Jane shall not , for the sake of one individual , change the meaning of principle and integrity , nor endeavour to persuade Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this dear Jane or Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this , that selfishness is prudence , and insensibility of danger security for happiness . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this must think Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this language too strong in speaking of both , ” replied Jane ; “ and Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this hope Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this will be convinced of it by seeing them happy together . But enough of this . Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this alluded to something else . Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this mentioned two instances . Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this can not misunderstand Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this , but Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this entreat Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this , Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this , not to pain Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this by thinking William Collins ’s to blame , and saying Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this opinion of William Collins ’s is sunk . We must not be so ready to fancy We intentionally injured . We must not expect a lively young man to be always so guarded and circumspect . It is very often nothing but our own vanity that deceives us . Women fancy admiration means more than admiration does . ” 
 
  “ And men take care that men should . ” 
 
  “ If it is designedly done , men can not be justified ; but Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this have no idea of there being so much design in the world as some persons imagine . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this am far from attributing any part of Charles ’s conduct to design , ” said Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this ; “ but without scheming to do wrong , or to make others unhappy , there may be error , and there may be misery . Thoughtlessness , want of attention to other people ’s feelings , and want of resolution , will do the business . ” 
 
  “ And do Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this impute it to either of Thoughtlessness , want of attention to other people ’s feelings , and want of resolution ? ” 
 
  “ Yes ; to the last . But if Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this go on , Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this shall displease Miss Bennet by saying what Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this think of persons Miss Bennet esteem . Stop Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this whilst Miss Bennet can . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this persist , then , in supposing Charles ’s sisters influence Charles ’s ? ” 
 
  “ Yes , in conjunction with Charles ’s friend . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this can not believe it . Why should Charles ’s sisters try to influence Charles ’s ? Charles ’s sisters can only wish Charles ’s happiness ; and if Charles ’s is attached to Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this , no other woman can secure Charles ’s happiness . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this first position is false . Charles ’s sisters may wish many things besides Charles ’s happiness ; Charles ’s sisters may wish Charles ’s increase of wealth and consequence ; Charles ’s sisters may wish Charles ’s to marry a girl who has all the importance of money , great connections , and pride . ” 
 
  “ Beyond a doubt , Charles ’s sisters do wish Charles ’s to choose Georgiana ’s , ” replied Jane ; “ but wish may be from better feelings than Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this are supposing . Charles ’s sisters have known Georgiana ’s much longer than Charles ’s sisters have known Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this ; no wonder if Charles ’s sisters love Georgiana ’s better . But , whatever may be Charles ’s sisters own wishes , it is very unlikely Charles ’s sisters should have opposed Charles ’s sisters brother ’s . What sister would think herself at liberty to do it , unless there were something very objectionable ? If Charles ’s sisters believed Charles ’s attached to Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this , Charles ’s sisters would not try to part their ; if Charles ’s were so , Charles ’s sisters could not succeed . By supposing such an affection , Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this make everybody acting unnaturally and wrong , and Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this most unhappy . Do not distress Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this by the idea . Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this am not ashamed of having been mistaken — or , at least , it is light , it is nothing in comparison of what Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this should feel in thinking ill of Charles ’s or Charles ’s sisters . Let Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this take it in the best light , in the light in which it may be understood . ” 
 
  Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this could not oppose such a wish ; and from this time Charles ’s name was scarcely ever mentioned between their . 
 
  Mother ’s still continued to wonder and repine at Charles ’s returning no more , and though a day seldom passed in which Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this did not account for it clearly , there was little chance of Mother ’s ever considering it with less perplexity . Mother ’s daughter endeavoured to convince Mother ’s of what Mother ’s did not believe Mother ’s , that Charles ’s attentions to Jane had been merely the effect of a common and transient liking , which ceased when Charles ’s saw Jane no more ; but though the probability of the statement was admitted at the time , Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this had the same story to repeat every day . Mother ’s best comfort was that Charles ’s must be down again in the summer . 
 
  Father treated the matter differently . “ So , Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this , ” said Father one day , “ Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this sister is crossed in love , Father find . Father congratulate Caroline ’s . Next to being married , a girl likes to be crossed a little in love now and then . be is something to think of , and be gives a girl a sort of distinction among a girl companions . When is Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this turn to come ? Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this will hardly bear to be long outdone by Jane . Now is Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this time . Here are officers enough in Meryton to disappoint all the young ladies in the country . Let George be Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this man . George is a pleasant fellow , and would jilt Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this creditably . ” 
 
  “ Thank Father , Father , but a less agreeable man would satisfy Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this . We must not all expect Jane ’s good fortune . ” 
 
  “ True , ” said Father , “ but it is a comfort to think that whatever of that kind may befall Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this , Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this have an affectionate mother who will make the most of it . ” 
 
  Charles ’s society was of material service in dispelling the gloom which the late perverse occurrences had thrown on many of the Longbourn family . many of the Longbourn family saw Charles ’s often , and to Charles ’s other recommendations was now added that of general unreserve . The whole of what Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this had already heard , Charles ’s claims on Fitzwilliam ’s , and all that Charles ’s had suffered from Fitzwilliam ’s , was now openly acknowledged and publicly canvassed ; and everybody was pleased to know how much everybody had always disliked Fitzwilliam ’s before everybody had known anything of the matter . Miss Bennet Miss Bennet was the only creature who could suppose there might be any extenuating circumstances in the case , unknown to the society of Hertfordshire ; Miss Bennet mild and steady candour always pleaded for allowances , and urged the possibility of mistakes — but by everybody else Fitzwilliam ’s was condemned as the worst of men . 
 Chapter 
 
  After a week spent in professions of love and schemes of felicity , William Collins was called from William Collins amiable Charlotte by the arrival of Saturday . The pain of separation , however , might be alleviated on William Collins side , by preparations for the reception of William Collins bride ; as William Collins had reason to hope , that shortly after William Collins return into Hertfordshire , the day would be fixed that was to make William Collins the happiest of men . William Collins took leave of William Collins relations at Longbourn with as much solemnity as before ; wished William Collins fair cousins health and happiness again , and promised William Collins fair cousins father another letter of thanks . 
 
  On the following Monday , Mother had the pleasure of receiving Mother brother and Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn . Mother brother was a sensible , gentlemanlike man , greatly superior to Mother brother sister , as well by nature as education . The Netherfield ladies would have had difficulty in believing that a man who lived by trade , and within view of Mother brother own warehouses , could have been so well - bred and agreeable . Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn , was an amiable , intelligent , elegant woman , and a great favourite with all Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn Longbourn nieces . Between the two eldest and Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn especially , there subsisted a particular regard . the two eldest had frequently been staying with Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn in town . 
 
  The first part of Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn business on Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn arrival was to distribute Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn presents and describe the newest fashions . When The first part of Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn business on Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn arrival was done Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn had a less active part to play . It became Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn turn to listen . Mother had many grievances to relate , and much to complain of . They had all been very ill - used since Mother last saw Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn . Two of Mother girls had been upon the point of marriage , and after all there was nothing in it . 
 
  “ Mother do not blame Jane , ” Mother continued , “ for Jane would have got Charles if Jane could . But Elizabeth ! Oh , sister ! It is very hard to think that Elizabeth ! might have been William Collins ’s wife by this time , had it not been for Elizabeth ! own perverseness . William Collins made Elizabeth ! an offer in this very room , and Elizabeth ! refused William Collins . The consequence of it is , that Lady Lucas will have a daughter married before Mother have , and that the Longbourn estate is just as much entailed as ever . Lady Lucas are very artful people indeed , Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn . Lady Lucas are all for what Lady Lucas can get . Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with sister am sorry to say it of Lady Lucas , but so it is . It makes Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with sister very nervous and poorly , to be thwarted so in Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with sister own family , and to have neighbours who think of themselves before anybody else . However , Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn coming just at this time is the greatest of comforts , and Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with sister am very glad to hear what Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn tell us , of long sleeves . ” 
 
  Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with , made Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with sister a slight answer , and , in compassion to Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with nieces , turned the conversation . 
 
  When alone with Elizabeth ! afterwards , Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with spoke more on the subject . “ It seems likely to have been a desirable match for Jane , ” said Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with . “ Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with am sorry it went off . But these things happen so often ! A young man , such as Elizabeth ! describe Charles , so easily falls in love with a pretty girl for a few weeks , and when accident separates them , so easily forgets a pretty girl , that these sort of inconsistencies are very frequent . ” 
 
  “ An excellent consolation in its way , ” said Elizabeth ! , “ but its will not do for us . We do not suffer by accident . It does not often happen that the interference of friends will persuade a young man of independent fortune to think no more of a girl whom a young man of independent fortune was violently in love with only a few days before . ” 
 
  “ But that expression of ‘ violently in love ’ is so hackneyed , so doubtful , so indefinite , that that expression of ‘ violently in love ’ gives Elizabeth ! very little idea . that expression of ‘ violently in love ’ is as often applied to feelings which arise from a half - hour ’s acquaintance , as to a real , strong attachment . Pray , how violent was Charles ’s love ? ” 
 
  “ Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with never saw a more promising inclination ; Charles was growing quite inattentive to other people , and wholly engrossed by Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn . Every time they met , Charles ’s love was more decided and remarkable . At Charles own ball Charles offended two or three young ladies , by not asking two or three young ladies to dance ; and Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with spoke to Charles twice Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with , without receiving an answer . Could there be finer symptoms ? Is not general incivility the very essence of love ? ” 
 
  “ Oh , yes!—of that kind of love which Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with suppose Charles to have felt . Poor Jane ! Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with am sorry for Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn , because , with Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn disposition , Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn may not get over am immediately . am had better have happened to Elizabeth ! , Elizabeth ! ; Elizabeth ! would have laughed Elizabeth ! out of am sooner . But do Elizabeth ! think Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn would be prevailed upon to go back with us ? Change of scene might be of service — and perhaps a little relief from home may be as useful as anything . ” 
 
  Elizabeth ! was exceedingly pleased with this proposal , and felt persuaded of Elizabeth ! sister ’s ready acquiescence . 
 
  “ Elizabeth ! hope , ” added Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn , “ that no consideration with regard to Charles will influence Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn . We live in so different a part of town , all We connections are so different , and , as Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn well know , we go out so little , that it is very improbable that they should meet at all , unless Charles really comes to see Jane . ” 
 
  “ And comes is quite impossible ; for Charles is now in the custody of Charles friend , and Fitzwilliam would no more suffer Charles to call on Jane in such a part of London ! Elizabeth ! dear aunt , how could Elizabeth ! think of it ? Fitzwilliam may perhaps have heard of such a place as Gracechurch Street , but Fitzwilliam would hardly think a month ’s ablution enough to cleanse Fitzwilliam from such a place as Gracechurch Street impurities , were Fitzwilliam once to enter such a place as Gracechurch Street ; and depend upon it , Charles never stirs without Charles . ” 
 
  “ So much the better . Elizabeth ! hope they will not meet at all . But does not Jane correspond with Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn ? Jane will not be able to help calling . ” 
 
  “ Jane will drop the acquaintance entirely . ” 
 
  But in spite of the certainty in which Elizabeth ! affected to place this point , as well as the still more interesting one of Charles ’s being withheld from seeing Jane , Elizabeth ! felt a solicitude on the subject which convinced Elizabeth ! , on examination , that Elizabeth ! did not consider it entirely hopeless . It was possible , and sometimes Elizabeth ! thought it probable , that Charles affection might be reanimated , and the influence of Charles friends successfully combated by the more natural influence of Jane ’s attractions . 
 
  Miss Bennet accepted Miss Bennet aunt ’s invitation with pleasure ; and the Bingleys were no otherwise in Miss Bennet thoughts at the same time , than as Miss Bennet hoped by Caroline ’s not living in the same house with Miss Bennet brother , Miss Bennet might occasionally spend a morning with Miss Bennet brother , without any danger of seeing Miss Bennet brother . 
 
  The Gardiners stayed a week at Longbourn ; and what with the Phillipses , Lady Lucas , and the officers , there was not a day without its engagement . Mother had so carefully provided for the entertainment of Mother brother and sister , that Mother brother and sister did not once sit down to a family dinner . When its engagement was for home , some of the officers always made part of its engagement — of which officers Charlie was sure to be one ; and on these occasions , Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with , rendered suspicious by Elizabeth ! warm commendation , narrowly observed they . Without supposing they , from what Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with saw , to be very seriously in love , they preference of each other was plain enough to make Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with a little uneasy ; and Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with resolved to speak to Elizabeth ! on the subject before Elizabeth ! left Hertfordshire , and represent to Elizabeth ! the imprudence of encouraging such an attachment . 
 
  To Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with , George had one means of affording pleasure , unconnected with George general powers . About ten or a dozen years ago , before Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with marriage , Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with had spent a considerable time in that very part of Derbyshire to which George belonged . They had , therefore , many acquaintances in common ; and though George had been little there since the death of Fitzwilliam ’s father , it was yet in George power to give Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with fresher intelligence of Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with former friends than Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with had been in the way of procuring . 
 
  Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with had seen Pemberley , and known the late Fitzwilliam by character perfectly well . Here consequently was an inexhaustible subject of discourse . In comparing Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with recollection of Pemberley with the minute description which George could give , and in bestowing Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with tribute of praise on the character of Fitzwilliam , Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with was delighting both George and Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with . On being made acquainted with the present Fitzwilliam ’s treatment of Fitzwilliam , Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with tried to remember some of Fitzwilliam reputed disposition when quite a lad which might agree with it , and was confident at last that Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with recollected having heard Mr. Fitzwilliam formerly spoken of as a very proud , ill - natured boy . 
 Chapter 
 
  Madeline ’s caution to Elizabeth was punctually and kindly given on the first favourable opportunity of speaking to Elizabeth alone ; after honestly telling Elizabeth what Madeline ’s thought , Madeline ’s thus went on : 
 
  “ Elizabeth are too sensible a girl , Elizabeth , to fall in love merely because Elizabeth are warned against fall ; and , therefore , Madeline ’s am not afraid of speaking openly . Seriously , Madeline ’s would have Elizabeth be on Elizabeth guard . Do not involve Elizabeth or endeavour to involve Charlie in an affection which the want of fortune would make so very imprudent . Madeline ’s have nothing to say against Charlie ; Charlie is a most interesting young man ; and if Charlie had the fortune Charlie ought to have , Madeline ’s should think Elizabeth could not do better . But as it is , Elizabeth must not let Elizabeth fancy run away with Elizabeth . Elizabeth have sense , and we all expect Elizabeth to use sense . Elizabeth father would depend on Elizabeth resolution and good conduct , Madeline ’s am sure . Elizabeth must not disappoint Elizabeth father . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth dear aunt , Madeline ’s is being serious indeed . ” 
 
  “ Yes , and Madeline ’s hope to engage Elizabeth to be serious likewise . ” 
 
  “ Well , then , Madeline ’s need not be under any alarm . Elizabeth will take care of Elizabeth , and of Charlie too . Charlie shall not be in love with Elizabeth , if Elizabeth can prevent be . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth , Elizabeth are not serious now . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth beg Madeline ’s pardon , Elizabeth will try again . At present Elizabeth am not in love with Charlie ; no , Elizabeth certainly am not . But Charlie is , beyond all comparison , the most agreeable man Elizabeth ever saw — and if Charlie becomes really attached to Elizabeth — Elizabeth believe it will be better that Charlie should not . Elizabeth see the imprudence of it . Oh ! that abominable Fitzwilliam ! Elizabeth father opinion of Elizabeth does Elizabeth the greatest honour , and Elizabeth should be miserable to forfeit the greatest honour . Elizabeth father , however , is partial to Charlie . In short , Elizabeth dear aunt , Elizabeth should be very sorry to be the means of making any of Madeline ’s unhappy ; but since we see every day that where there is affection , young people are seldom withheld by immediate want of fortune from entering into engagements with each other , how can Elizabeth promise to be wiser than so many of Elizabeth fellow - creatures if Elizabeth am tempted , or how am Elizabeth even to know that it would be wisdom to resist ? All that Elizabeth can promise Madeline ’s , therefore , is not to be in a hurry . Elizabeth will not be in a hurry to believe Elizabeth Charlie first object . When Elizabeth am in company with Charlie , Elizabeth will not be wishing . In short , Elizabeth will do Elizabeth best . ” 
 
  “ Perhaps it will be as well if Elizabeth discourage Charlie coming here so very often . At least , Elizabeth should not remind Elizabeth mother of inviting Charlie . ” 
 
  “ As Elizabeth did the other day , ” said Elizabeth with a conscious smile : “ very true , it will be wise in Elizabeth to refrain from remind . But do not imagine that Charlie is always here so often . It is on Madeline ’s account that Charlie has been so frequently invited this week . Madeline ’s know Elizabeth mother ’s ideas as to the necessity of constant company for Elizabeth mother friends . But really , and upon Elizabeth honour , Elizabeth will try to do what Elizabeth think to be the wisest ; and now Elizabeth hope Madeline ’s are satisfied . ” 
 
  Elizabeth aunt assured Elizabeth that Madeline ’s was , and Elizabeth having thanked Madeline ’s for the kindness of Madeline ’s hints , they parted ; a wonderful instance of advice being given on such a point , without being resented . 
 
  Charlie returned into Hertfordshire soon after it had been quitted by the Gardiners and Jane ; but as Charlie took up Charlie abode with the Lucases , Charlie arrival was no great inconvenience to Elizabeth mother . Charlie marriage was now fast approaching , and Elizabeth mother was at length so far resigned as to think Charlie marriage inevitable , and even repeatedly to say , in an ill - natured tone , that Elizabeth mother “ wished they might be happy . ” Thursday was to be the wedding day , and on Wednesday Elizabeth mother paid Elizabeth mother farewell visit ; and when Elizabeth mother rose to take leave , Elizabeth , ashamed of Elizabeth mother ’s ungracious and reluctant good wishes , and sincerely affected Elizabeth , accompanied Elizabeth mother out of the room . As they went downstairs together , Charlotte said : 
 
  “ Charlotte shall depend on hearing from Elizabeth very often , Elizabeth . ” 
 
  “ That Charlotte certainly shall . ” 
 
  “ And Charlotte have another favour to ask Elizabeth . Will Elizabeth come and see Charlotte ? ” 
 
  “ We shall often meet , Elizabeth hope , in Hertfordshire . ” 
 
  “ Charlotte am not likely to leave Kent for some time . Promise Charlotte , therefore , to come to Hunsford . ” 
 
  Elizabeth could not refuse , though Elizabeth foresaw little pleasure in come . 
 
  “ Elizabeth father and Maria are coming to Charlotte in March , ” added Charlotte , “ and Charlotte hope Elizabeth will consent to be of the party . Indeed , Elizabeth , Elizabeth will be as welcome as either of Elizabeth father and Maria . ” 
 
  Charlie marriage took place ; the bride and bridegroom set off for Kent from the church door , and everybody had as much to say , or to hear , on the subject as usual . Elizabeth soon heard from Elizabeth friend ; and their correspondence was as regular and frequent as their correspondence had ever been ; that their correspondence should be equally unreserved was impossible . Elizabeth could never address Charlotte without feeling that all the comfort of intimacy was over , and though determined not to slacken as a correspondent , slacken was for the sake of what had been , rather than what was . Charlotte ’s first letters were received with a good deal of eagerness ; there could not but be curiosity to know how Charlotte would speak of Charlotte new home , how Charlotte would like Cathleen , and how happy Charlotte would dare pronounce Charlotte to be ; though , when Charlotte ’s first letters were read , Elizabeth felt that Charlotte expressed Charlotte on every point exactly as Elizabeth might have foreseen . Charlotte wrote cheerfully , seemed surrounded with comforts , and mentioned nothing which Charlotte could not praise . The house , furniture , neighbourhood , and roads , were all to Charlotte taste , and Cathleen ’s behaviour was most friendly and obliging . It was Charlie picture of Hunsford and Rosings rationally softened ; and Elizabeth perceived that Elizabeth must wait for Elizabeth own visit there to know the rest . 
 
  Jane had already written a few lines to Jane sister to announce Caroline and Mrs. Hurst safe arrival in London ; and when Jane wrote again , Elizabeth hoped it would be in Elizabeth power to say something of the Bingleys . 
 
  Elizabeth impatience for this second letter was as well rewarded as impatience generally is . Jane had been a week in town without either seeing or hearing from Caroline . Jane accounted for been , however , by supposing that Jane last letter to Jane friend from Longbourn had by some accident been lost . 
 
  “ Jane aunt , ” Jane continued , “ is going to - morrow into that part of London , and Jane shall take the opportunity of calling in Grosvenor Street . ” 
 
  Jane wrote again when the visit was paid , and Jane had seen Caroline . “ Elizabeth did not think Caroline in spirits , ” were Jane words , “ but Caroline was very glad to see Elizabeth , and reproached Elizabeth for giving Caroline no notice of Elizabeth coming to London . Elizabeth was right , therefore , Elizabeth last letter had never reached Caroline . Elizabeth enquired after Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother , of course . Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother was well , but so much engaged with that abominable Fitzwilliam that Caroline and Mrs. Hurst scarcely ever saw Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother . Elizabeth found that Georgiana was expected to dinner . Elizabeth wish Elizabeth could see Georgiana . Elizabeth visit was not long , as Caroline and Mrs. Hurst were going out . Elizabeth dare say Elizabeth shall see Caroline and Mrs. Hurst soon here . ” Elizabeth Elizabeth shook Elizabeth head over this second letter . this second letter convinced Elizabeth that accident only could discover to Charlotte Caroline being in town . 
 
  Four weeks passed away , and Jane saw nothing of Charlie . Jane endeavoured to persuade Jane that Jane did not regret it ; but Jane could no longer be blind to Caroline ’s inattention . After waiting at home every morning for a fortnight , and inventing every evening a fresh excuse for Jane , Jane did at last appear ; but the shortness of Jane stay , and yet more , the alteration of Jane manner would allow Jane to deceive Jane no longer . The letter which Jane wrote on this occasion to Elizabeth will prove what Jane felt . 
 
  “ Elizabeth dearest Elizabeth will , Elizabeth am sure , be incapable of triumphing in Elizabeth better judgement , at Elizabeth expense , when Elizabeth confess Elizabeth to have been entirely deceived in Caroline ’s regard for Elizabeth . But , Elizabeth dear sister , though the event has proved Elizabeth right , do not think Elizabeth obstinate if Elizabeth still assert that , considering what Caroline behaviour was , Elizabeth confidence was as natural as Elizabeth suspicion . Elizabeth do not at all comprehend Caroline reason for wishing to be intimate with Elizabeth ; but if the same circumstances were to happen again , Elizabeth am sure Elizabeth should be deceived again . Caroline did not return Elizabeth visit till yesterday ; and not a note , not a line , did Elizabeth receive in the meantime . When Caroline did come , it was very evident that Caroline had no pleasure in come ; Caroline made a slight , formal apology , for not calling before , said not a word of wishing to see Elizabeth again , and was in every respect so altered a creature , that when Caroline went away Elizabeth was perfectly resolved to continue the acquaintance no longer . Elizabeth pity , though Elizabeth can not help blaming Caroline . Caroline was very wrong in singling Elizabeth out as Caroline did ; Elizabeth can safely say that every advance to intimacy began on Caroline side . But Elizabeth pity Caroline , because Caroline must feel that Caroline has been acting wrong , and because Elizabeth am very sure that anxiety for Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother is the cause of acting . Elizabeth need not explain Elizabeth farther ; and though we know that anxiety for Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother to be quite needless , yet if Caroline feels that anxiety for Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother , that anxiety for Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother will easily account for Caroline behaviour to Elizabeth ; and so deservedly dear as Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother is to Caroline , whatever anxiety Caroline must feel on Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother behalf is natural and amiable . Elizabeth can not but wonder , however , at Caroline having any such fears now , because , if Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother had at all cared about Elizabeth , we must have met , long ago . Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother knows of Elizabeth being in town , Elizabeth am certain , from something Caroline said Caroline ; and yet it would seem , by Caroline manner of talking , as if Caroline wanted to persuade Caroline that Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother is really partial to Georgiana . Elizabeth can not understand it . If Elizabeth were not afraid of judging harshly , Elizabeth should be almost tempted to say that there is a strong appearance of duplicity in all this . But Elizabeth will endeavour to banish every painful thought , and think only of what will make Elizabeth happy — Madeline ’s affection , and the invariable kindness of Elizabeth dear uncle and aunt . Let Elizabeth hear from Madeline ’s very soon . Caroline said something of Caroline never returning to Netherfield again , of giving up the house , but not with any certainty . We had better not mention it . Elizabeth am extremely glad that Madeline ’s have such pleasant accounts from our friends at Hunsford . Pray go to see our friends at Hunsford , with Sir William and Maria . Elizabeth am sure Madeline ’s will be very comfortable there.—Yours , etc . ” 
 
  this second letter gave Elizabeth some pain ; but Elizabeth spirits returned as Elizabeth considered that Jane would no longer be duped , by Caroline at least . All expectation from Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother was now absolutely over . Jane would not even wish for a renewal of Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother attentions . Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother character sunk on every review of Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother character ; and as a punishment for Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother , as well as a possible advantage to Jane , Elizabeth seriously hoped Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother might really soon marry that abominable Fitzwilliam sister , as by George ’s account , she would make Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother abundantly regret what Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother had thrown away . 
 
  Madeline about this time reminded Elizabeth of Elizabeth promise concerning Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother , and required information ; and Elizabeth had such to send as might rather give contentment to Madeline ’s than to Elizabeth . Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother apparent partiality had subsided , Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother attentions were over , Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother was the admirer of some one else . Elizabeth was watchful enough to see it all , but Elizabeth could see it all and write of it all without material pain . Elizabeth heart had been but slightly touched , and Elizabeth vanity was satisfied with believing that Elizabeth would have been Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother only choice , had fortune permitted been . The sudden acquisition of ten thousand pounds was the most remarkable charm of Elizabeth ; but Elizabeth , less clear - sighted perhaps in this case than in Charlotte ’s , did not quarrel with Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother for Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother wish of independence . Nothing , on the contrary , could be more natural ; and while able to suppose that it cost Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother a few struggles to relinquish Elizabeth , Elizabeth was ready to allow relinquish a wise and desirable measure for both , and could very sincerely wish Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother happy . 
 
  All this was acknowledged to Madeline ’s ; and after relating the circumstances , Elizabeth thus went on : “ Elizabeth am now convinced , Madeline ’s , that Elizabeth have never been much in love ; for had Elizabeth really experienced that pure and elevating passion , Elizabeth should at present detest Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother very name , and wish Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother all manner of evil . But Elizabeth feelings are not only cordial towards Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother ; Elizabeth feelings are even impartial towards Caroline . Elizabeth can not find out that Elizabeth hate Caroline at all , or that Elizabeth am in the least unwilling to think Caroline a very good sort of girl . There can be no love in all this . Elizabeth watchfulness has been effectual ; and though Elizabeth certainly should be a more interesting object to all Elizabeth acquaintances were Elizabeth distractedly in love with Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother , Elizabeth can not say that Elizabeth regret Elizabeth comparative insignificance . Importance may sometimes be purchased too dearly . Caroline and Mrs. Hurst take Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother defection much more to heart than Elizabeth do . Caroline and Mrs. Hurst are young in the ways of the world , and not yet open to the mortifying conviction that handsome young men must have something to live on as well as the plain . ” 
 Chapter 
 
  With no greater events than these in the Longbourn family , and otherwise diversified by little beyond the walks to Meryton , sometimes dirty and sometimes cold , did January and February pass away . March was to take Elizabeth to Hunsford . Elizabeth had not at first thought very seriously of going thither ; but Charlotte , Elizabeth soon found , was depending on the plan and Elizabeth gradually learned to consider the plan Elizabeth with greater pleasure as well as greater certainty . Absence had increased Elizabeth desire of seeing Charlotte again , and weakened Elizabeth disgust of William Collins . There was novelty in the plan , and as , with such a mother and such uncompanionable sisters , home could not be faultless , a little change was not unwelcome for a little change own sake . The journey would moreover give Elizabeth a peep at Jane ; and , in short , as the time drew near , Elizabeth would have been very sorry for any delay . Everything , however , went on smoothly , and was finally settled according to Charlotte ’s first sketch . Elizabeth was to accompany William Collins and William Collins second daughter . The improvement of spending a night in London was added in time , and the plan became perfect as plan could be . 
 
  The only pain was in leaving Elizabeth father , who would certainly miss Elizabeth , and who , when it came to the point , so little liked Elizabeth going , that he told Elizabeth to write to he , and almost promised to answer Elizabeth letter . 
 
  The farewell between Elizabeth and Charlotte was perfectly friendly ; on William Collins side even more . William Collins present pursuit could not make William Collins forget that Elizabeth had been the first to excite and to deserve William Collins attention , the first to listen and to pity , the first to be admired ; and in William Collins manner of bidding Elizabeth adieu , wishing Elizabeth every enjoyment , reminding Elizabeth of what Elizabeth was to expect in Cathleen , and trusting their opinion of Elizabeth — their opinion of everybody — would always coincide , there was a solicitude , an interest which Elizabeth felt must ever attach Elizabeth to William Collins with a most sincere regard ; and Elizabeth parted from William Collins convinced that , whether married or single , William Collins must always be Elizabeth model of the amiable and pleasing . 
 
  Elizabeth fellow - travellers the next day were not of a kind to make Elizabeth think William Collins less agreeable . William Collins , and William Collins daughter Maria , a good - humoured girl , but as empty - headed as William Collins , had nothing to say that could be worth hearing , and were listened to with about as much delight as the rattle of the chaise . Elizabeth loved absurdities , but Elizabeth had known William Collins too long . William Collins could tell Elizabeth nothing new of the wonders of William Collins presentation and knighthood ; and William Collins civilities were worn out , like William Collins information . 
 
  It was a journey of only twenty - four miles , and they began it so early as to be in Gracechurch Street by noon . As they drove to Edward ’s door , Jane was at a drawing - room window watching they arrival ; when they entered the passage Jane was there to welcome they , and Elizabeth , looking earnestly in Elizabeth face , was pleased to see Elizabeth face healthful and lovely as ever . On the stairs were a troop of little boys and girls , whose eagerness for their cousin ’s appearance would not allow their to wait in the drawing - room , and whose shyness , as their had not seen Elizabeth for a twelvemonth , prevented their coming lower . All was joy and kindness . The day passed most pleasantly away ; the morning in bustle and shopping , and the evening at one of the theatres . 
 
  Elizabeth then contrived to sit by Elizabeth aunt . Their first object was Elizabeth sister ; and Elizabeth was more grieved than astonished to hear , in reply to Elizabeth minute enquiries , that though Jane always struggled to support Jane spirits , there were periods of dejection . It was reasonable , however , to hope that they would not continue long . Madeline gave Elizabeth the particulars also of Caroline ’s visit in Gracechurch Street , and repeated conversations occurring at different times between Jane and Elizabeth , which proved that Jane had , from Jane heart , given up the acquaintance . 
 
  Madeline then rallied Madeline niece on George ’s desertion , and complimented Elizabeth on bearing George ’s desertion so well . 
 
  “ But Madeline dear Elizabeth , ” Madeline added , “ what sort of girl is William Collins second daughter ? Madeline should be sorry to think our friend mercenary . ” 
 
  “ Pray , Madeline , what is the difference in matrimonial affairs , between the mercenary and the prudent motive ? Where does discretion end , and avarice begin ? Last Christmas Madeline were afraid of George ’s marrying Elizabeth , because marrying would be imprudent ; and now , because George ’s is trying to get a girl with only ten thousand pounds , Madeline want to find out that George ’s is mercenary . ” 
 
  “ If Madeline will only tell Elizabeth what sort of girl William Collins second daughter is , Elizabeth shall know what to think . ” 
 
  “ William Collins second daughter is a very good kind of girl , Madeline believe . Madeline know no harm of William Collins second daughter . ” 
 
  “ But George ’s paid William Collins second daughter not the smallest attention till William Collins second daughter grandfather ’s death made William Collins second daughter mistress of this fortune . ” 
 
  “ No — why should George ’s ? If it were not allowable for George ’s to gain Elizabeth affections because Elizabeth had no money , what occasion could there be for making love to a girl whom George ’s did not care about , and who was equally poor ? ” 
 
  “ But there seems an indelicacy in directing George ’s attentions towards William Collins second daughter so soon after this event . ” 
 
  “ A man in distressed circumstances has not time for all those elegant decorums which other people may observe . If William Collins second daughter does not object to directing , why should we ? ” 
 
  “ William Collins second daughter not objecting does not justify George ’s . William Collins second daughter not objecting only shows William Collins second daughter being deficient in something William Collins second daughter — sense or feeling . ” 
 
  “ Well , ” cried Elizabeth , “ have it as Madeline choose . George ’s shall be mercenary , and William Collins second daughter shall be foolish . ” 
 
  “ No , Elizabeth , that is what Madeline do not choose . Madeline should be sorry , Elizabeth know , to think ill of a young man who has lived so long in Derbyshire . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! if that is all , Elizabeth have a very poor opinion of young men who live in Derbyshire ; and young men who live in Derbyshire intimate friends who live in Hertfordshire are not much better . Elizabeth am sick of them all . Thank Heaven ! Elizabeth am going to - morrow where Elizabeth shall find a man who has not one agreeable quality , who has neither manner nor sense to recommend a man who has not one agreeable quality , who has neither manner nor sense to recommend . Stupid men are the only ones worth knowing , after all . ” 
 
  “ Take care , Elizabeth ; that speech savours strongly of disappointment . ” 
 
  Before they were separated by the conclusion of the play , Elizabeth had the unexpected happiness of an invitation to accompany Elizabeth uncle and aunt in a tour of pleasure which Elizabeth uncle and aunt proposed taking in the summer . 
 
  “ Elizabeth uncle and aunt have not determined how far a tour of pleasure which Elizabeth uncle and aunt proposed taking in the summer shall carry Elizabeth uncle and aunt , ” said Madeline , “ but , perhaps , to the Lakes . ” 
 
  No scheme could have been more agreeable to Elizabeth , and Elizabeth acceptance of an invitation to accompany Elizabeth uncle and aunt in a tour of pleasure which Elizabeth uncle and aunt proposed taking in the summer was most ready and grateful . “ Oh , Madeline , ” Elizabeth rapturously cried , “ what delight ! what felicity ! Madeline give Elizabeth fresh life and vigour . Adieu to disappointment and spleen . What are young men to rocks and mountains ? Oh ! what hours of transport Elizabeth uncle and aunt shall spend ! And when Elizabeth uncle and aunt do return , it shall not be like other travellers , without being able to give one accurate idea of anything . Elizabeth uncle and aunt will know where Elizabeth uncle and aunt have gone — Elizabeth uncle and aunt will recollect what Elizabeth uncle and aunt have seen . Lakes , mountains , and rivers shall not be jumbled together in Elizabeth uncle and aunt imaginations ; nor when Elizabeth uncle and aunt attempt to describe any particular scene , will Elizabeth uncle and aunt begin quarreling about any particular scene relative situation . Let Elizabeth uncle and aunt first effusions be less insupportable than those of the generality of travellers . ” 
 Chapter 
 
  Every object in the next day ’s journey was new and interesting to Elizabeth ; and Elizabeth spirits were in a state of enjoyment ; for Elizabeth had seen Elizabeth sister looking so well as to banish all fear for Elizabeth sister health , and the prospect of Elizabeth sister northern tour was a constant source of delight . 
 
  When they left the high road for the lane to Hunsford , every eye was in search of the Parsonage , and every turning expected to bring the Parsonage in view . The palings of Rosings Park was they boundary on one side . Elizabeth smiled at the recollection of all that Elizabeth had heard of the Parsonage inhabitants . 
 
  At length the Parsonage was discernible . The garden sloping to the road , the Parsonage standing in The garden sloping to the road , the green pales , and the laurel hedge , everything declared they were arriving . William Collins and Charlotte appeared at the door , and the carriage stopped at the small gate which led by a short gravel walk to the Parsonage , amidst the nods and smiles of the whole party . In a moment the whole party were all out of the chaise , rejoicing at the sight of each other . William Collins welcomed William Collins friend with the liveliest pleasure , and Elizabeth was more and more satisfied with coming when Elizabeth found Elizabeth so affectionately received . Elizabeth saw instantly that William Collins manners were not altered by William Collins marriage ; William Collins formal civility was just what William Collins formal civility had been , and William Collins detained Elizabeth some minutes at the small gate which led by a short gravel walk to the Parsonage to hear and satisfy William Collins enquiries after all Elizabeth family . the ladies were then , with no other delay than William Collins pointing out the neatness of the entrance , taken into the Parsonage ; and as soon as the ladies were in the parlour , William Collins welcomed the ladies a second time , with ostentatious formality to William Collins humble abode , and punctually repeated all Charlotte offers of refreshment . 
 
  Elizabeth was prepared to see William Collins in William Collins glory ; and Elizabeth could not help in fancying that in displaying the good proportion of the room , the room aspect and the room furniture , William Collins addressed William Collins particularly to Elizabeth , as if wishing to make Elizabeth feel what Elizabeth had lost in refusing William Collins . But though everything seemed neat and comfortable , Elizabeth was not able to gratify William Collins by any sigh of repentance , and rather looked with wonder at Elizabeth friend that Elizabeth could have so cheerful an air with such a companion . When William Collins said anything of which William Collins wife might reasonably be ashamed , which certainly was not unseldom , Elizabeth involuntarily turned Elizabeth eye on Charlotte . Once or twice Elizabeth could discern a faint blush ; but in general Charlotte wisely did not hear . After sitting long enough to admire every article of furniture in the room , from the sideboard to the fender , to give an account of the ladies journey , and of all that had happened in Hunsford , William Collins invited the ladies to take a stroll in the garden , which was large and well laid out , and to the cultivation of which William Collins attended William Collins . To work in the garden , which was large and well laid out , and to the cultivation of which William Collins attended William Collins was one of William Collins most respectable pleasures ; and Elizabeth admired the command of countenance with which Charlotte talked of the healthfulness of the exercise , and owned Charlotte encouraged the exercise as much as possible . Here , leading the way through every walk and cross walk , and scarcely allowing the ladies an interval to utter the praises William Collins asked for , every view was pointed out with a minuteness which left beauty entirely behind . William Collins could number the fields in every direction , and could tell how many trees there were in the most distant clump . But of all the views which the garden , which was large and well laid out , and to the cultivation of which William Collins attended William Collins , or which the country or kingdom could boast , none were to be compared with the prospect of Rosings , afforded by an opening in the trees that bordered the park nearly opposite the front of William Collins house . the Parsonage was a handsome modern building , well situated on rising ground . 
 
  From the garden , which was large and well laid out , and to the cultivation of which William Collins attended William Collins , William Collins would have led the ladies round William Collins two meadows ; but the ladies , not having shoes to encounter the remains of a white frost , turned back ; and while William Collins accompanied William Collins , Charlotte took Elizabeth over the Parsonage , extremely well pleased , probably , to have the opportunity of showing the Parsonage without Charlotte husband ’s help . the Parsonage was rather small , but well built and convenient ; and everything was fitted up and arranged with a neatness and consistency of which Elizabeth gave Charlotte all the credit . When William Collins could be forgotten , there was really an air of great comfort throughout , and by Charlotte ’s evident enjoyment of it , Elizabeth supposed William Collins must be often forgotten . 
 
  Elizabeth had already learnt that Cathleen was still in the country . It was spoken of again while the ladies were at dinner , when William Collins joining in , observed : 
 
  “ Yes , Miss Elizabeth , Elizabeth will have the honour of seeing Cathleen on the ensuing Sunday at church , and I need not say Elizabeth will be delighted with Cathleen . Cathleen is all affability and condescension , and I doubt not but Elizabeth will be honoured with some portion of Cathleen notice when service is over . I have scarcely any hesitation in saying Cathleen will include Elizabeth and I sister Maria in every invitation with which Cathleen honours us during Elizabeth stay here . Cathleen behaviour to I dear Charlotte is charming . We dine at Rosings twice every week , and are never allowed to walk home . Cathleen carriage is regularly ordered for We . I should say , the carriage the carriage , for Cathleen has several . ” 
 
  “ Cathleen is a very respectable , sensible woman indeed , ” added Charlotte , “ and a most attentive neighbour . ” 
 
  “ Very true , I dear , that is exactly what I say . Cathleen is the sort of woman whom one can not regard with too much deference . ” 
 
  The evening was spent chiefly in talking over Hertfordshire news , and telling again what had already been written ; and when The evening closed , Elizabeth , in the solitude of Elizabeth chamber , had to meditate upon Charlotte ’s degree of contentment , to understand Charlotte address in guiding , and composure in bearing with , William Collins , and to acknowledge that it was all done very well . Elizabeth had also to anticipate how Elizabeth visit would pass , the quiet tenor of their usual employments , the vexatious interruptions of William Collins , and the gaieties of their intercourse with Rosings . A lively imagination soon settled it all . 
 
  About the middle of the next day , as Elizabeth was in Elizabeth room getting ready for a walk , a sudden noise below seemed to speak the whole house in confusion ; and , after listening a moment , Elizabeth heard somebody running up stairs in a violent hurry , and calling loudly after somebody . Elizabeth opened the door and met Maria in the landing place , who , breathless with agitation , cried out — 
 
  “ Oh , my dear Elizabeth ! pray make haste and come into the dining - room , for there is such a sight to be seen ! I sister Maria will not tell Elizabeth what such a sight to be seen is . Make haste , and come down this moment . ” 
 
  Elizabeth asked questions in vain ; I sister Maria would tell Elizabeth nothing more , and down the ladies ran into the dining - room , which fronted the lane to Hunsford , in quest of such a sight to be seen ; It was two ladies stopping in a low phaeton at the small gate which led by a short gravel walk to the Parsonage . 
 
  “ And is this all ? ” cried Elizabeth . “ Elizabeth expected at least that the pigs were got into the garden , which was large and well laid out , and to the cultivation of which William Collins attended William Collins , and here is nothing but Cathleen and Cathleen daughter . ” 
 
  “ La ! I sister Maria dear , ” said I sister Maria , quite shocked at the mistake , “ it is not Cathleen . The old lady is Mrs. Jenkinson , who lives with them ; the other is Cathleen . Only look at Cathleen . Cathleen is quite a little creature . Who would have thought that Cathleen could be so thin and small ? ” 
 
  “ Cathleen is abominably rude to keep Charlotte out of doors in all this wind . Why does Cathleen not come in ? ” 
 
  “ Oh , Charlotte says Cathleen hardly ever does . It is the greatest of favours when Cathleen comes in . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth like Cathleen appearance , ” said Elizabeth , struck with other ideas . “ Cathleen looks sickly and cross . Yes , Cathleen will do for him very well . Cathleen will make him a very proper wife . ” William Collins William Collins and Charlotte were both standing at the small gate which led by a short gravel walk to the Parsonage in conversation with the ladies ; and William Collins , to Elizabeth ’s high diversion , was stationed in the doorway , in earnest contemplation of the greatness before William Collins , and constantly bowing whenever Cathleen looked that way . 
 
  At length there was nothing more to be said ; the ladies drove on , and the others returned into the Parsonage . William Collins no sooner saw the ladies than William Collins began to congratulate the ladies on the ladies good fortune , which Charlotte explained by letting the ladies know that the whole party was asked to dine at Rosings the next day . 
 Chapter 
 
  William Collins ’s triumph , in consequence of this invitation , was complete . The power of displaying the grandeur of William Collins ’s patroness to William Collins ’s wondering visitors , and of letting William Collins ’s wondering visitors see William Collins ’s patroness civility towards William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife , was exactly what William Collins ’s had wished for ; and that an opportunity of doing it should be given so soon , was such an instance of William Collins ’s patroness condescension , as William Collins ’s knew not how to admire enough . 
 
  “ William Collins ’s confess , ” said William Collins ’s , “ that William Collins ’s should not have been at all surprised by William Collins ’s patroness asking William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife on Sunday to drink tea and spend the evening at Rosings . William Collins ’s rather expected , from William Collins ’s knowledge of William Collins ’s patroness affability , that it would happen . But who could have foreseen such an attention as this ? Who could have imagined that William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife should receive an invitation to dine there ( an invitation , moreover , including the whole party ) so immediately after your arrival ! ” 
 
  “ William Collins ’s am the less surprised at what has happened , ” replied William Collins ’s , “ from that knowledge of what the manners of the great really are , which William Collins ’s situation in life has allowed William Collins ’s to acquire . About the court , such instances of elegant breeding are not uncommon . ” 
 
  Scarcely anything was talked of the whole day or next morning but William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife visit to Rosings . William Collins ’s was carefully instructing William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife in what William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife were to expect , that the sight of such rooms , so many servants , and so splendid a dinner , might not wholly overpower William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife . 
 
  When William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife were separating for the toilette , William Collins ’s said to Elizabeth — 
 
  “ Do not make Elizabeth uneasy , Elizabeth , about Elizabeth apparel . William Collins ’s patroness is far from requiring that elegance of dress in us which becomes William Collins ’s patroness and William Collins ’s patroness daughter . William Collins ’s would advise Elizabeth merely to put on whatever of Elizabeth clothes is superior to the rest — there is no occasion for anything more . William Collins ’s patroness will not think the worse of Elizabeth for being simply dressed . William Collins ’s patroness likes to have the distinction of rank preserved . ” 
 
  While William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife were dressing , William Collins ’s came two or three times to William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife different doors , to recommend William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife being quick , as William Collins ’s patroness very much objected to be kept waiting for William Collins ’s patroness dinner . Such formidable accounts of William Collins ’s patroness , and William Collins ’s patroness manner of living , quite frightened Maria Lucas who had been little used to company , and Maria Lucas who had been little used to company looked forward to Maria Lucas who had been little used to company introduction at Rosings with as much apprehension as Maria Lucas who had been little used to company father had done to William Collins ’s presentation at St. James ’s . 
 
  As the weather was fine , William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife had a pleasant walk of about half a mile across the park . Every park has Every park beauty and Every park prospects ; and Elizabeth saw much to be pleased with , though Elizabeth could not be in such raptures as William Collins ’s expected the scene to inspire , and was but slightly affected by William Collins ’s enumeration of the windows in front of the house , and William Collins ’s relation of what the glazing altogether had originally cost Sir Lewis de Bourgh . 
 
  When William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife ascended the steps to the hall , Maria ’s alarm was every moment increasing , and William Collins ’s did not look perfectly calm . Elizabeth ’s courage did not fail Elizabeth . Elizabeth had heard nothing of William Collins ’s patroness that spoke Elizabeth awful from any extraordinary talents or miraculous virtue , and the mere stateliness of money or rank Elizabeth thought Elizabeth could witness without trepidation . 
 
  From the hall , William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife followed the servants through an ante - chamber , to the room where William Collins ’s patroness , William Collins ’s patroness daughter , and Mrs. Jenkinson were sitting . William Collins ’s patroness , with great condescension , arose to receive William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife ; and as William Collins ’s had settled it with William Collins ’s husband that the office of introduction should be Elizabeth , the office of introduction was performed in a proper manner , without any of those apologies and thanks which William Collins ’s would have thought necessary . 
 
  In spite of having been at St. James ’s , William Collins ’s was so completely awed by the grandeur surrounding William Collins ’s , that William Collins ’s had but just courage enough to make a very low bow , and take William Collins ’s seat without saying a word ; and William Collins ’s patroness daughter , frightened almost out of William Collins ’s patroness daughter senses , sat on the edge of William Collins ’s patroness daughter chair , not knowing which way to look . Elizabeth found Elizabeth quite equal to the scene , and could observe William Collins ’s patroness , William Collins ’s patroness daughter , and Mrs. Jenkinson composedly . William Collins ’s patroness was a tall , large woman , with strongly - marked features , which might once have been handsome . William Collins ’s patroness air was not conciliating , nor was William Collins ’s patroness manner of receiving William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife such as to make William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife forget William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife inferior rank . William Collins ’s patroness was not rendered formidable by silence ; but whatever William Collins ’s patroness said was spoken in so authoritative a tone , as marked William Collins ’s patroness self - importance , and brought William Collins ’s patroness daughter immediately to Elizabeth ’s mind ; and from the observation of the day altogether , Elizabeth believed William Collins ’s patroness to be exactly what William Collins ’s represented . 
 
  When , after examining the mother , in whose countenance and deportment Elizabeth soon found some resemblance of Fitzwilliam , Elizabeth turned Elizabeth eyes on Elizabeth , Elizabeth could almost have joined in Maria ’s astonishment at Elizabeth being so thin and so small . There was neither in figure nor face any likeness between William Collins ’s patroness , William Collins ’s patroness daughter , and Mrs. Jenkinson . William Collins ’s patroness was pale and sickly ; William Collins ’s patroness features , though not plain , were insignificant ; and William Collins ’s patroness spoke very little , except in a low voice , to Mrs. Jenkinson , in whose appearance there was nothing remarkable , and who was entirely engaged in listening to what William Collins ’s patroness said , and placing a screen in the proper direction before William Collins ’s patroness eyes . 
 
  After sitting a few minutes , William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife were all sent to one of the windows to admire the view , William Collins ’s attending William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife to point out the view beauties , and William Collins ’s patroness kindly informing William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife that the view was much better worth looking at in the summer . 
 
  The dinner was exceedingly handsome , and there were all the servants and all the articles of plate which William Collins ’s had promised ; and , as William Collins ’s had likewise foretold , William Collins ’s took William Collins ’s seat at the bottom of the table , by William Collins ’s patroness desire , and looked as if William Collins ’s felt that life could furnish nothing greater . William Collins ’s carved , and ate , and praised with delighted alacrity ; and every dish was commended , first by William Collins ’s and then by Sir William , who was now enough recovered to echo whatever William Collins ’s son - in - law said , in a manner which Elizabeth wondered William Collins ’s patroness could bear . But William Collins ’s patroness seemed gratified by their excessive admiration , and gave most gracious smiles , especially when any dish on the table proved a novelty to their . William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife did not supply much conversation . Elizabeth was ready to speak whenever there was an opening , but Elizabeth was seated between Charlotte and William Collins ’s patroness — the former of whom was engaged in listening to William Collins ’s patroness , and the latter said not a word to Elizabeth all dinner - time . Mrs. Jenkinson was chiefly employed in watching how little William Collins ’s patroness ate , pressing William Collins ’s patroness to try some other dish , and fearing William Collins ’s patroness was indisposed . Maria ’s thought speaking out of the question , and the gentlemen did nothing but eat and admire . 
 
  When William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife returned to the drawing - room , there was little to be done but to hear William Collins ’s patroness talk , which William Collins ’s patroness did without any intermission till coffee came in , delivering William Collins ’s patroness opinion on every subject in so decisive a manner , as proved that William Collins ’s patroness was not used to have William Collins ’s patroness judgement controverted . William Collins ’s patroness enquired into Charlotte ’s domestic concerns familiarly and minutely , gave Charlotte a great deal of advice as to the management of Charlotte ’s domestic concerns ; told Charlotte how everything ought to be regulated in so small a family as Charlotte , and instructed Charlotte as to the care of Charlotte cows and Charlotte poultry . Elizabeth found that nothing was beneath William Collins ’s patroness attention , which could furnish William Collins ’s patroness with an occasion of dictating to others . In the intervals of William Collins ’s patroness discourse with William Collins ’s , William Collins ’s patroness addressed a variety of questions to Maria ’s and Elizabeth , but especially to Elizabeth . William Collins ’s patroness asked Elizabeth , at different times , how many sisters Elizabeth had , whether they were older or younger than Elizabeth , whether any of they were likely to be married , whether they were handsome , where they had been educated , what carriage Elizabeth father kept , and what had been Elizabeth mother ’s maiden name ? Elizabeth felt all the impertinence of William Collins ’s patroness questions but answered William Collins ’s patroness questions very composedly . William Collins ’s patroness then observed , 
 
  “ William Collins ’s estate is entailed on William Collins ’s , William Collins ’s patroness think . For Charlotte sake , ” turning to Charlotte , “ William Collins ’s patroness am glad of is ; but otherwise William Collins ’s patroness see no occasion for entailing estates from the female line . entailing was not thought necessary in Sir Lewis de Bourgh ’s family . Do Charlotte play and sing , Charlotte ? ” 
 
  “ A little . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! then — some time or other we shall be happy to hear Charlotte . we instrument is a capital one , probably superior to —— Charlotte shall try we instrument some day . Do Charlotte sisters play and sing ? ” 
 
  “ One of Charlotte sisters does . ” 
 
  “ Why did not William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife learn ? William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife ought all to have learned . The Miss Webbs all play , and William Collins ’s has not so good an income as William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife . Do Charlotte draw ? ” 
 
  “ No , not at all . ” 
 
  “ What , none of William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife ? ” 
 
  “ Not one . ” 
 
  “ That is very strange . But William Collins ’s patroness suppose Charlotte had no opportunity . Charlotte mother should have taken Charlotte to town every spring for the benefit of masters . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth mother ’s would have had no objection , but Charlotte father hates London . ” 
 
  “ Has Charlotte governess left Charlotte ? ” 
 
  “ William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife never had any governess . ” 
 
  “ No governess ! How was that possible ? William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife brought up at home without a governess ! William Collins ’s patroness never heard of such a thing . Charlotte mother must have been quite a slave to Charlotte education . ” 
 
  Elizabeth could hardly help smiling as Elizabeth assured William Collins ’s patroness been had not been the case . 
 
  “ Then , who taught Charlotte ? who attended to Charlotte ? Without a governess , Charlotte must have been neglected . ” 
 
  “ Compared with some families , Elizabeth believe William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife were ; but such of William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife as wished to learn never wanted the means . William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife were always encouraged to read , and had all the masters that were necessary . Those who chose to be idle , certainly might . ” 
 
  “ Aye , no doubt ; but that is what a governess will prevent , and if William Collins ’s patroness had known Charlotte mother , William Collins ’s patroness should have advised Elizabeth mother ’s most strenuously to engage one . William Collins ’s patroness always say that nothing is to be done in education without steady and regular instruction , and nobody but a governess can give education . It is wonderful how many families William Collins ’s patroness have been the means of supplying in that way . William Collins ’s patroness am always glad to get a young person well placed out . Four nieces of Mrs. Jenkinson are most delightfully situated through William Collins ’s patroness means ; and it was but the other day that William Collins ’s patroness recommended another young person , who was merely accidentally mentioned to William Collins ’s patroness , and the family are quite delighted with another young person , who was merely accidentally mentioned to William Collins ’s patroness . William Collins ’s , did William Collins ’s patroness tell William Collins ’s of Lady Metcalf ’s calling yesterday to thank William Collins ’s patroness ? Lady Metcalf ’s finds Miss Pope a treasure . ‘ William Collins ’s patroness , ’ said Lady Metcalf ’s , ‘ William Collins ’s patroness have given Lady Metcalf ’s a treasure . ’ Are any of Charlotte younger sisters out , Charlotte ? ” 
 
  “ Yes , William Collins ’s patroness , all . ” 
 
  “ All ! What , All ! out at once ? Very odd ! And Charlotte only the second . Charlotte younger sisters out before the elder ones are married ! Charlotte younger sisters must be very young ? ” 
 
  “ Yes , Charlotte youngest is not sixteen . Perhaps Charlotte youngest is full young to be much in company . But really , William Collins ’s patroness , Charlotte think it would be very hard upon younger sisters , that younger sisters should not have younger sisters share of society and amusement , because the elder may not have the means or inclination to marry early . The last - born has as good a right to the pleasures of youth as the first . And to be kept back on such a motive ! Charlotte think such a motive would not be very likely to promote sisterly affection or delicacy of mind . ” 
 
  “ Upon William Collins ’s patroness word , ” said William Collins ’s patroness , “ Elizabeth give Elizabeth opinion very decidedly for so young a person . Pray , what is Elizabeth age ? ” 
 
  “ With three younger sisters grown up , ” replied Elizabeth , smiling , “ William Collins ’s patroness can hardly expect Elizabeth to own it . ” 
 
  William Collins ’s patroness seemed quite astonished at not receiving a direct answer ; and Elizabeth suspected Elizabeth to be the first creature who had ever dared to trifle with so much dignified impertinence . 
 
  “ Elizabeth can not be more than twenty , William Collins ’s patroness am sure , therefore Elizabeth need not conceal Elizabeth age . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth am not one - and - twenty . ” 
 
  When the gentlemen had joined them , and tea was over , the card - tables were placed . William Collins ’s patroness , William Collins ’s , and Mr. and Mrs. Collins sat down to quadrille ; and as William Collins ’s patroness chose to play at cassino , William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife had the honour of assisting Mrs. Jenkinson to make up Mrs. Jenkinson party . William Collins ’s patroness , William Collins ’s , and Mr. and Mrs. Collins table was superlatively stupid . Scarcely a syllable was uttered that did not relate to quadrille , except when Mrs. Jenkinson expressed Mrs. Jenkinson fears of William Collins ’s patroness being too hot or too cold , or having too much or too little light . A great deal more passed at the other table . William Collins ’s patroness was generally speaking — stating the mistakes of William Collins ’s patroness , William Collins ’s patroness daughter , and Mrs. Jenkinson , or relating some anecdote of William Collins ’s patroness . William Collins ’s was employed in agreeing to everything William Collins ’s patroness said , thanking William Collins ’s patroness for every fish William Collins ’s won , and apologising if William Collins ’s thought William Collins ’s won too many . William Collins ’s did not say much . William Collins ’s was storing William Collins ’s memory with anecdotes and noble names . 
 
  When William Collins ’s patroness and Elizabeth had played as long as William Collins ’s patroness and Elizabeth chose , the tables were broken up , the carriage was offered to William Collins ’s , gratefully accepted and immediately ordered . William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife then gathered round the fire to hear William Collins ’s patroness determine what weather William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife were to have on the morrow . From these instructions William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife were summoned by the arrival of the carriage ; and with many speeches of thankfulness on William Collins ’s side and as many bows on William Collins ’s William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife departed . As soon as William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife had driven from the door , Elizabeth was called on by Elizabeth cousin to give Elizabeth opinion of all that Elizabeth had seen at Rosings , which , for Charlotte ’s sake , Elizabeth made more favourable than Elizabeth opinion of all that Elizabeth had seen at Rosings , which , for Charlotte ’s sake , Elizabeth made more favourable than really was . But Elizabeth commendation , though costing Elizabeth some trouble , could by no means satisfy William Collins ’s , and William Collins ’s was very soon obliged to take Elizabeth praise into William Collins ’s own hands . 
 Chapter 
 
  Sir William stayed only a week at Hunsford , but Sir William visit was long enough to convince Sir William of Sir William daughter ’s being most comfortably settled , and of Sir William daughter ’s possessing such a husband and such a neighbour as were not often met with . While Sir William was with the whole family , Sir William devoted Sir William morning to driving Sir William out in Sir William gig , and showing Sir William the country ; but when Sir William went away , the whole family returned to the whole family usual employments , and Elizabeth was thankful to find that the whole family did not see more of Elizabeth cousin by the alteration , for the chief of the time between breakfast and dinner was now passed by Sir William either at work in the garden or in reading and writing , and looking out of the window in Sir William own book - room , which fronted the road . The room in which the whole family sat was backwards . Elizabeth had at first rather wondered that Charlotte should not prefer the dining - parlour for common use ; the dining - parlour was a better sized room , and had a more pleasant aspect ; but Elizabeth soon saw that Charlotte had an excellent reason for what Charlotte did , for Sir William would undoubtedly have been much less in Sir William own apartment , had they sat in one equally lively ; and Elizabeth gave Charlotte credit for the arrangement . 
 
  From the drawing - room the whole family could distinguish nothing in the lane , and were indebted to Sir William for the knowledge of what carriages went along , and how often especially Cathleen drove by in especially Cathleen phaeton , which Sir William never failed coming to inform the whole family of , though it happened almost every day . especially Cathleen not unfrequently stopped at the Parsonage , and had a few minutes ’ conversation with Charlotte , but was scarcely ever prevailed upon to get out . 
 
  Very few days passed in which Sir William did not walk to Rosings , and not many in which Sir William wife did not think it necessary to go likewise ; and till Elizabeth recollected that there might be other family livings to be disposed of , Elizabeth could not understand the sacrifice of so many hours . Now and then the whole family were honoured with a call from her ladyship , and nothing escaped her ladyship observation that was passing in the room during these visits . her ladyship examined into the whole family employments , looked at the whole family work , and advised the whole family to do the whole family work differently ; found fault with the arrangement of the furniture ; or detected the housemaid in negligence ; and if her ladyship accepted any refreshment , seemed to do it only for the sake of finding out that Sir William joints of meat were too large for Sir William family . Elizabeth Elizabeth soon perceived , that though her ladyship was not in the commission of the peace of the county , her ladyship was a most active magistrate in her ladyship own parish , the minutest concerns of which were carried to her ladyship by Sir William ; and whenever any of the cottagers were disposed to be quarrelsome , discontented , or too poor , her ladyship sallied forth into the village to settle any of the cottagers differences , silence any of the cottagers complaints , and scold any of the cottagers into harmony and plenty . 
 
  The entertainment of dining at Rosings was repeated about twice a week ; and , allowing for the loss of Sir William , and there being only one card - table in the evening , every such entertainment was the counterpart of the first . the whole family other engagements were few , as the style of living in the neighbourhood in general was beyond Sir William reach . This , however , was no evil to Elizabeth , and upon the whole Elizabeth spent Elizabeth time comfortably enough ; there were half - hours of pleasant conversation with Charlotte , and the weather was so fine for the time of year that Elizabeth had often great enjoyment out of doors . Elizabeth favourite walk , and where Elizabeth frequently went while the others were calling on especially Cathleen , was along the open grove which edged that side of the park , where there was a nice sheltered path , which no one seemed to value but Elizabeth , and where Elizabeth felt beyond the reach of especially Cathleen curiosity . 
 
  In this quiet way , the first fortnight of Elizabeth visit soon passed away . Easter was approaching , and the week preceding Easter was to bring an addition to the family at Rosings , which in so small a circle must be important . Elizabeth had heard soon after Elizabeth arrival that Fitzwilliam was expected there in the course of a few weeks , and though there were not many of Elizabeth acquaintances whom Elizabeth did not prefer , Fitzwilliam coming would furnish one comparatively new to look at in their Rosings parties , and Elizabeth might be amused in seeing how hopeless Caroline ’s designs on Fitzwilliam were , by Fitzwilliam behaviour to Fitzwilliam cousin , for whom Fitzwilliam was evidently destined by Cathleen , who talked of Fitzwilliam coming with the greatest satisfaction , spoke of Fitzwilliam in terms of the highest admiration , and seemed almost angry to find that Fitzwilliam had already been frequently seen by Miss Lucas and Miss Lucas . 
 
  Fitzwilliam arrival was soon known at the Parsonage ; for Sir William was walking the whole morning within view of the lodges opening into the lane , in order to have the earliest assurance of Fitzwilliam coming , and after making Sir William bow as the carriage turned into the Park , hurried home with the great intelligence . On the following morning Sir William hastened to Rosings to pay Sir William respects . There were two nephews of especially Cathleen to require two nephews of especially Cathleen , for Fitzwilliam had brought with Fitzwilliam a Fitzwilam , the younger son of Fitzwilliam uncle Lord — — , and , to the great surprise of all the party , when Sir William returned , the gentlemen accompanied Sir William . Charlotte had seen the three gentlemen from Charlotte husband ’s room , crossing the road , and immediately running into the other , told the whole family what an honour the whole family might expect , adding : 
 
  “ Charlotte may thank Elizabeth , Elizabeth , for this piece of civility . Fitzwilliam would never have come so soon to wait upon Charlotte . ” Elizabeth Elizabeth had scarcely time to disclaim all right to the compliment , before the three gentlemen approach was announced by the door - bell , and shortly afterwards the three gentlemen entered the room . a Fitzwilam , the younger son of Fitzwilliam uncle Lord , was about thirty , not handsome , but in person and address most truly the gentleman . Fitzwilliam looked just as Fitzwilliam had been used to look in Hertfordshire — paid Fitzwilliam compliments , with Fitzwilliam usual reserve , to Elizabeth , and whatever might be Fitzwilliam feelings toward Elizabeth friend , met Elizabeth with every appearance of composure . Elizabeth merely curtseyed to Fitzwilliam without saying a word . 
 
  Fitzwilliam entered into conversation directly with the readiness and ease of a well - bred man , and talked very pleasantly ; but Fitzwilliam cousin , after having addressed a slight observation on the house and garden to Elizabeth , sat for some time without speaking to anybody . At length , however , Fitzwilliam civility was so far awakened as to enquire of Elizabeth after the health of Elizabeth family . Elizabeth answered Fitzwilliam in the usual way , and after a moment ’s pause , added : 
 
  “ Elizabeth eldest sister has been in town these three months . Have Fitzwilliam never happened to see Elizabeth eldest sister there ? ” 
 
  Elizabeth was perfectly sensible that Fitzwilliam never had ; but Elizabeth wished to see whether Fitzwilliam would betray any consciousness of what had passed between the Bingleys and Jane , and Elizabeth thought Fitzwilliam looked a little confused as Fitzwilliam answered that Fitzwilliam had never been so fortunate as to meet Elizabeth eldest sister . The subject was pursued no farther , and the gentlemen soon afterwards went away . 
 Chapter 
 
  Fitzwilam ’s manners were very much admired at the Parsonage , and the ladies all felt that Fitzwilam ’s must add considerably to the pleasures of the ladies all engagements at Rosings . It was some days , however , before the ladies all received any invitation thither — for while there were visitors in the Parsonage , visitors could not be necessary ; and it was not till Easter - day , almost a week after the gentlemen ’s arrival , that the ladies all were honoured by such an attention , and then the ladies all were merely asked on leaving church to come there in the evening . For the last week the ladies all had seen very little of Cathleen or Cathleen daughter . Fitzwilam ’s had called at the Parsonage more than once during the last week , but Fitzwilliam the ladies all had seen only at church . 
 
  asked was accepted of course , and at a proper hour the ladies all joined the party in Cathleen ’s drawing - room . Cathleen received the ladies all civilly , but it was plain that the ladies all company was by no means so acceptable as when Cathleen could get nobody else ; and Cathleen was , in fact , almost engrossed by Cathleen nephews , speaking to Cathleen nephews , especially to Fitzwilliam , much more than to any other person in the room . 
 
  Fitzwilam ’s seemed really glad to see the ladies all ; anything was a welcome relief to Fitzwilam ’s at Rosings ; and Cathleen daughter had moreover caught Fitzwilam ’s fancy very much . Fitzwilliam now seated Fitzwilliam by Cathleen daughter , and talked so agreeably of Kent and Hertfordshire , of travelling and staying at home , of new books and music , that Cathleen daughter had never been half so well entertained in Cathleen ’s drawing - room before ; and they conversed with so much spirit and flow , as to draw the attention of Cathleen herself , as well as of Fitzwilliam . Fitzwilliam eyes had been soon and repeatedly turned towards the ladies all with a look of curiosity ; and that Cathleen , after a while , shared the feeling , was more openly acknowledged , for Cathleen did not scruple to call out : 
 
  “ What is that Fitzwilliam are saying , Fitzwilliam ? What is it Fitzwilliam are talking of ? What are Fitzwilliam telling Cathleen daughter ? Let Cathleen hear what it is . ” 
 
  “ they are speaking of music , Cathleen , ” said Fitzwilliam , when no longer able to avoid a reply . 
 
  “ Of music ! Then pray speak aloud . It is of all subjects Cathleen delight . Cathleen must have Cathleen share in the conversation if Fitzwilliam are speaking of music . There are few people in England , Cathleen suppose , who have more true enjoyment of music than Cathleen , or a better natural taste . If Cathleen had ever learnt , Cathleen should have been a great proficient . And so would Anne , if Anne health had allowed Anne to apply . Cathleen am confident that Anne would have performed delightfully . How does Georgiana get on , Fitzwilliam ? ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam spoke with affectionate praise of Anne proficiency . 
 
  “ Cathleen am very glad to hear such a good account of Anne , ” said Cathleen ; “ and pray tell Anne from Cathleen , that Anne can not expect to excel if Anne does not practice a good deal . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam assure Cathleen , Cathleen , ” Fitzwilliam replied , “ that Anne does not need such advice . Anne practises very constantly . ” 
 
  “ So much the better . practises can not be done too much ; and when Fitzwilliam next write to Anne , Fitzwilliam shall charge Anne not to neglect practises on any account . Fitzwilliam often tell young ladies that no excellence in music is to be acquired without constant practice . Fitzwilliam have told Cathleen daughter several times , that Cathleen daughter will never play really well unless Cathleen daughter practises more ; and though Cathleen daughter has no instrument , Cathleen daughter is very welcome , as Fitzwilliam have often told Cathleen daughter , to come to Rosings every day , and play on the pianoforte in Mrs. Jenkinson ’s room . Cathleen daughter would be in nobody ’s way , you know , in that part of the Parsonage . ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam looked a little ashamed of Cathleen ill - breeding , and made no answer . 
 
  When coffee was over , Fitzwilam ’s reminded Cathleen daughter of having promised to play to Fitzwilam ’s ; and Cathleen daughter sat down directly to the instrument . Fitzwilam ’s drew a chair near Cathleen daughter . Cathleen listened to half a song , and then talked , as before , to Cathleen other nephew ; till Fitzwilliam walked away from Cathleen , and making with Fitzwilliam usual deliberation towards the pianoforte stationed Fitzwilliam so as to command a full view of Cathleen daughter countenance . Cathleen daughter saw what Fitzwilliam was doing , and at the first convenient pause , turned to Fitzwilliam with an arch smile , and said : 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam mean to frighten Cathleen daughter , Fitzwilliam , by coming in all this state to hear Cathleen daughter ? Cathleen daughter will not be alarmed though Fitzwilliam sister does play so well . There is a stubbornness about Cathleen daughter that never can bear to be frightened at the will of others . Cathleen daughter courage always rises at every attempt to intimidate Cathleen daughter . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam shall not say Cathleen daughter are mistaken , ” Fitzwilliam replied , “ because Cathleen daughter could not really believe Fitzwilliam to entertain any design of alarming Cathleen daughter ; and Fitzwilliam have had the pleasure of Cathleen daughter acquaintance long enough to know that Cathleen daughter find great enjoyment in occasionally professing opinions which in fact are not Cathleen daughter own . ” 
 
  Cathleen daughter laughed heartily at this picture of Cathleen daughter , and said to Fitzwilliam , “ Fitzwilliam cousin will give Fitzwilliam a very pretty notion of Cathleen daughter , and teach Fitzwilliam not to believe a word Cathleen daughter say . Cathleen daughter am particularly unlucky in meeting with a person so able to expose Cathleen daughter real character , in a part of the world where Cathleen daughter had hoped to pass Cathleen daughter off with some degree of credit . Indeed , Fitzwilliam , it is very ungenerous in Fitzwilliam to mention all that Fitzwilliam knew to Cathleen daughter disadvantage in Hertfordshire — and , give Cathleen daughter leave to say , very impolitic too — for mention is provoking Cathleen daughter to retaliate , and such things may come out as will shock Fitzwilliam relations to hear . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam am not afraid of Cathleen daughter , ” said Fitzwilliam , smilingly . 
 
  “ Pray let Fitzwilliam hear what Fitzwilliam have to accuse Fitzwilliam of , ” cried Fitzwilliam . “ Fitzwilliam should like to know how Fitzwilliam behaves among strangers . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam shall hear then — but prepare Fitzwilliam for something very dreadful . The first time of Fitzwilliam ever seeing Fitzwilliam in Hertfordshire , Fitzwilliam must know , was at a ball — and at a ball , what do Fitzwilliam think Fitzwilliam did ? Fitzwilliam danced only four dances , though gentlemen were scarce ; and , to Fitzwilliam certain knowledge , more than one young lady was sitting down in want of a partner . Fitzwilliam , Fitzwilliam can not deny the fact . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam had not at that time the honour of knowing any lady in the assembly beyond Fitzwilliam own party . ” 
 
  “ True ; and nobody can ever be introduced in a ball - room . Well , Fitzwilliam , what do Cathleen daughter play next ? Cathleen daughter fingers wait Fitzwilliam orders . ” 
 
  “ Perhaps , ” said Fitzwilliam , “ Fitzwilliam should have judged better , had Fitzwilliam sought an introduction ; but Fitzwilliam am ill - qualified to recommend Fitzwilliam to strangers . ” 
 
  “ Shall we ask Fitzwilliam cousin the reason of am ? ” said Cathleen daughter , still addressing Fitzwilliam . “ Shall we ask Fitzwilliam why a man of sense and education , and who has lived in the world , is ill qualified to recommend Fitzwilliam to strangers ? ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam can answer Cathleen daughter question , ” said Fitzwilliam , “ without applying to Fitzwilliam . It is because Fitzwilliam will not give Fitzwilliam the trouble . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam certainly have not the talent which some people possess , ” said Fitzwilliam , “ of conversing easily with those Fitzwilliam have never seen before . Fitzwilliam can not catch those Fitzwilliam have never seen before tone of conversation , or appear interested in those Fitzwilliam have never seen before concerns , as Fitzwilliam often see done . ” 
 
  “ Cathleen daughter fingers , ” said Cathleen daughter , “ do not move over the instrument in the masterly manner which Cathleen daughter see so many women ’s do . Cathleen daughter fingers have not the same force or rapidity , and do not produce the same expression . But then Cathleen daughter have always supposed it to be Cathleen daughter own fault — because Cathleen daughter will not take the trouble of practising . It is not that Cathleen daughter do not believe Cathleen daughter fingers as capable as any other woman ’s of superior execution . ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam smiled and said , “ Cathleen daughter are perfectly right . Cathleen daughter have employed Cathleen daughter time much better . No one admitted to the privilege of hearing Cathleen daughter can think anything wanting . We neither of We perform to strangers . ” 
 
  Here We were interrupted by Cathleen , who called out to know what We were talking of . Cathleen daughter immediately began playing again . Cathleen , who called out to know what We were talking of approached , and , after listening for a few minutes , said to Fitzwilliam : 
 
  “ Cathleen daughter would not play at all amiss if Cathleen daughter practised more , and could have the advantage of a London master . Cathleen daughter has a very good notion of fingering , though Cathleen daughter taste is not equal to Anne ’s . Anne would have been a delightful performer , had Anne health allowed Anne to learn . ” 
 
  Cathleen daughter looked at Fitzwilliam to see how cordially Fitzwilliam assented to Fitzwilliam cousin ’s praise ; but neither at that moment nor at any other could Cathleen daughter discern any symptom of love ; and from the whole of Fitzwilliam behaviour to Cathleen , who called out to know what We were talking of Cathleen daughter derived this comfort for Caroline , that Fitzwilliam might have been just as likely to marry Caroline , had Cathleen , who called out to know what We were talking of been Fitzwilliam relation . 
 
  Cathleen , who called out to know what We were talking of continued Cathleen , who called out to know what We were talking of remarks on Cathleen daughter performance , mixing with Cathleen , who called out to know what We were talking of remarks on Cathleen daughter performance many instructions on execution and taste . Cathleen daughter received Cathleen , who called out to know what We were talking of remarks on Cathleen daughter performance with all the forbearance of civility , and , at the request of the gentlemen ’s , remained at the instrument till Cathleen ladyship ’s carriage was ready to take the ladies all home . 
 Chapter 
 
  Elizabeth was sitting by Elizabeth the next morning , and writing to Jane while Mrs. Collins and Maria were gone on business into the village , when Elizabeth was startled by a ring at the door , the certain signal of a visitor . As Elizabeth had heard no carriage , Elizabeth thought a visitor not unlikely to be Cathleen , and under that apprehension was putting away Elizabeth half - finished letter that Elizabeth might escape all impertinent questions , when the door opened , and , to Elizabeth very great surprise , Fitzwilliam , and Fitzwilliam only , entered the room . 
 
  Fitzwilliam seemed astonished too on finding Elizabeth alone , and apologised for Fitzwilliam intrusion by letting Elizabeth know that Fitzwilliam had understood all the ladies were to be within . 
 
  They then sat down , and when Elizabeth enquiries after Rosings were made , seemed in danger of sinking into total silence . It was absolutely necessary , therefore , to think of something , and in this emergence recollecting when Elizabeth had seen Fitzwilliam last in Hertfordshire , and feeling curious to know what Fitzwilliam would say on the subject of their hasty departure , Elizabeth observed : 
 
  “ How very suddenly their quitted Netherfield last November , Fitzwilliam ! It must have been a most agreeable surprise to Charles to see their after Charles so soon ; for , if Elizabeth recollect right , Charles went but the day before . Charles and Charles sisters were well , Elizabeth hope , when Fitzwilliam left London ? ” 
 
  “ Perfectly so , Fitzwilliam thank Elizabeth . ” 
 
  Elizabeth found that Elizabeth was to receive no other answer , and , after a short pause added : 
 
  “ Elizabeth think Elizabeth have understood that Charles has not much idea of ever returning to Netherfield again ? ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam have never heard Charles say so ; but it is probable that Charles may spend very little of Charles time there in the future . Charles has many friends , and is at a time of life when friends and engagements are continually increasing . ” 
 
  “ If Charles means to be but little at Netherfield , it would be better for the neighbourhood that Charles should give up the place entirely , for then we might possibly get a settled family there . But , perhaps , Charles did not take the place so much for the convenience of the neighbourhood as for Charles own , and we must expect Charles to keep the place or quit the place on the same principle . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam should not be surprised , ” said Fitzwilliam , “ if Charles were to give the place up as soon as any eligible purchase offers . ” 
 
  Elizabeth made no answer . Elizabeth was afraid of talking longer of Fitzwilliam friend ; and , having nothing else to say , was now determined to leave the trouble of finding a subject to Fitzwilliam . 
 
  Fitzwilliam took the hint , and soon began with , “ the place seems a very comfortable house . Cathleen , Elizabeth believe , did a great deal to the place when Charles first came to Hunsford . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth believe Cathleen did — and Elizabeth am sure Cathleen could not have bestowed Cathleen kindness on a more grateful object . ” 
 
  “ Charles appears to be very fortunate in Charles choice of a wife . ” 
 
  “ Yes , indeed , Charles friends may well rejoice in Charles having met with one of the very few sensible women who would have accepted Charles , or have made Charles happy if they had . Elizabeth has an excellent understanding — though Elizabeth am not certain that Elizabeth consider Elizabeth marrying Charles as the wisest thing Elizabeth ever did . Elizabeth seems perfectly happy , however , and in a prudential light it is certainly a very good match for Elizabeth . ” 
 
  “ It must be very agreeable for Elizabeth to be settled within so easy a distance of Elizabeth own family and friends . ” 
 
  “ An easy distance , do Elizabeth call it ? It is nearly fifty miles . ” 
 
  “ And what is fifty miles of good road ? Little more than half a day ’s journey . Yes , Elizabeth call it a very easy distance . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth should never have considered the distance as one of the advantages of the match , ” cried Elizabeth . “ Elizabeth should never have said Elizabeth was settled near Elizabeth family . ” 
 
  “ the distance is a proof of Elizabeth own attachment to Hertfordshire . Anything beyond the very neighbourhood of Longbourn , Fitzwilliam suppose , would appear far . ” 
 
  As Fitzwilliam spoke there was a sort of smile which Elizabeth fancied Elizabeth understood ; Fitzwilliam must be supposing Elizabeth to be thinking of Jane and Netherfield , and Elizabeth blushed as Elizabeth answered : 
 
  “ Elizabeth do not mean to say that a woman may not be settled too near a woman family . The far and the near must be relative , and depend on many varying circumstances . Where there is fortune to make the expenses of travelling unimportant , distance becomes no evil . But that is not the case here . Charles and Charles sisters have a comfortable income , but not such a one as will allow of frequent journeys — and Fitzwilliam am persuaded Elizabeth would not call Elizabeth near Elizabeth family under less than half the present distance . ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam drew Fitzwilliam chair a little towards Elizabeth , and said , “ Elizabeth can not have a right to such very strong local attachment . Elizabeth can not have been always at Longbourn . ” 
 
  Elizabeth looked surprised . Fitzwilliam experienced some change of feeling ; Fitzwilliam drew back Fitzwilliam chair , took a newspaper from the table , and glancing over a newspaper , said , in a colder voice : 
 
  “ Are Elizabeth pleased with Kent ? ” 
 
  A short dialogue on the subject of the country ensued , on either side calm and concise — and soon put an end to by the entrance of Charlotte and Charlotte sister , just returned from Charlotte sister , just returned from walk . The tête - à - tête surprised Charlotte and Charlotte sister , just returned from Charlotte sister , just returned from walk . Fitzwilliam related the mistake which had occasioned Fitzwilliam intruding on Elizabeth , and after sitting a few minutes longer without saying much to anybody , went away . 
 
  “ What can be the meaning of this ? ” said Charlotte , as soon as Fitzwilliam was gone . “ Charlotte dear , Elizabeth , Fitzwilliam must be in love with Elizabeth , or Fitzwilliam would never have called on us in this familiar way . ” 
 
  But when Elizabeth told of Fitzwilliam silence , it did not seem very likely , even to Charlotte ’s wishes , to be the case ; and after various conjectures , Charlotte and Charlotte sister , just returned from Charlotte sister , just returned from walk could at last only suppose Fitzwilliam visit to proceed from the difficulty of finding anything to do , which was the more probable from the time of year . All field sports were over . Within doors there was Cathleen , books , and a billiard - table , but gentlemen can not always be within doors ; and in the nearness of the Parsonage , or the pleasantness of the walk to the Parsonage , or of the people who lived in the Parsonage , Charlotte and Charlotte sister , just returned from Charlotte sister , just returned from walk found a temptation from this period of walking thither almost every day . Charlotte and Charlotte sister , just returned from Charlotte sister , just returned from walk called at various times of the morning , sometimes separately , sometimes together , and now and then accompanied by Charlotte and Charlotte sister , just returned from Charlotte sister , just returned from walk aunt . It was plain to Charlotte and Charlotte sister , just returned from Charlotte sister , just returned from walk that Fitzwilliam came because Fitzwilliam had pleasure in Charlotte and Charlotte sister , just returned from Charlotte sister , just returned from walk society , a persuasion which of course recommended Fitzwilliam still more ; and Elizabeth was reminded by Elizabeth own satisfaction in being with Fitzwilliam , as well as by Fitzwilliam evident admiration of Elizabeth , of Elizabeth former favourite George ; and though , in comparing them , Elizabeth saw there was less captivating softness in Fitzwilliam manners , Elizabeth believed Fitzwilliam might have the best informed mind . 
 
  But why Fitzwilliam came so often to the Parsonage , it was more difficult to understand . came could not be for society , as Fitzwilliam frequently sat there ten minutes together without opening Fitzwilliam lips ; and when Fitzwilliam did speak , speak seemed the effect of necessity rather than of choice — a sacrifice to propriety , not a pleasure to Fitzwilliam . Fitzwilliam seldom appeared really animated . Elizabeth knew not what to make of Fitzwilliam . Fitzwilliam occasionally laughing at Fitzwilliam stupidity , proved that Fitzwilliam was generally different , which Elizabeth own knowledge of Fitzwilliam could not have told Elizabeth ; and as Elizabeth would liked to have believed this change the effect of love , and the object of that love Elizabeth friend Elizabeth , Elizabeth set Elizabeth seriously to work to find it out . Elizabeth watched Fitzwilliam whenever they were at Rosings , and whenever Fitzwilliam came to Hunsford ; but without much success . Fitzwilliam certainly looked at Elizabeth friend a great deal , but the expression of looked was disputable . looked was an earnest , steadfast gaze , but Elizabeth often doubted whether there were much admiration in looked , and sometimes looked seemed nothing but absence of mind . 
 
  Elizabeth had once or twice suggested to Elizabeth the possibility of Fitzwilliam being partial to Elizabeth , but Elizabeth always laughed at the possibility of Fitzwilliam being partial to Elizabeth ; and Elizabeth did not think it right to press the subject , from the danger of raising expectations which might only end in disappointment ; for in Elizabeth opinion it admitted not of a doubt , that all Elizabeth friend ’s dislike would vanish , if Elizabeth could suppose Fitzwilliam to be in Elizabeth power . 
 
  In Elizabeth kind schemes for Elizabeth , Elizabeth sometimes planned Elizabeth marrying Fitzwilliam . Fitzwilliam was beyond comparison the most pleasant man ; Fitzwilliam certainly admired Elizabeth , and Fitzwilliam situation in life was most eligible ; but , to counterbalance these advantages , Fitzwilliam had considerable patronage in the church , and Fitzwilliam cousin could have none at all . 
 Chapter 
 
  More than once did Elizabeth , in Elizabeth ramble within the park , unexpectedly meet Fitzwilliam . Elizabeth felt all the perverseness of the mischance that should bring Fitzwilliam where no one else was brought , and , to prevent the mischance that should bring Fitzwilliam where no one else was brought ever happening again , took care to inform Fitzwilliam at first that it was a favourite haunt of Elizabeth . How the mischance that should bring Fitzwilliam where no one else was brought could occur a second time , therefore , was very odd ! Yet the mischance that should bring Fitzwilliam where no one else was brought did , and even a third . It seemed like wilful ill - nature , or a voluntary penance , for on these occasions it was not merely a few formal enquiries and an awkward pause and then away , but Fitzwilliam actually thought it necessary to turn back and walk with Elizabeth . Fitzwilliam never said a great deal , nor did Elizabeth give Elizabeth the trouble of talking or of listening much ; but it struck Elizabeth in the course of their third rencontre that Fitzwilliam was asking some odd unconnected questions — about Elizabeth pleasure in being at Hunsford , Elizabeth love of solitary walks , and Elizabeth opinion of Mr. and Mrs. Collins ’s happiness ; and that in speaking of Rosings and Elizabeth not perfectly understanding the house , Fitzwilliam seemed to expect that whenever Elizabeth came into Kent again Elizabeth would be staying there too . Fitzwilliam words seemed to imply it . Could Fitzwilliam have Fitzwilam in Fitzwilliam thoughts ? Elizabeth supposed , if Fitzwilliam meant anything , Fitzwilliam must mean an allusion to what might arise in that quarter . It distressed Elizabeth a little , and Elizabeth was quite glad to find Elizabeth at the gate in the pales opposite the Parsonage . 
 
  Elizabeth was engaged one day as Elizabeth walked , in perusing Jane ’s last letter , and dwelling on some passages which proved that Jane ’s had not written in spirits , when , instead of being again surprised by Fitzwilliam , Elizabeth saw on looking up that Fitzwilliam was meeting Elizabeth . Putting away Jane ’s last letter immediately and forcing a smile , Elizabeth said : 
 
  “ Elizabeth did not know before that Fitzwilliam ever walked this way . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam have been making the tour of the park , ” Fitzwilliam replied , “ as Fitzwilliam generally do every year , and intend to close the tour of the park with a call at the Parsonage . Are Fitzwilliam going much farther ? ” 
 
  “ No , Fitzwilliam should have turned in a moment . ” 
 
  And accordingly Elizabeth did turn , and they walked towards the Parsonage together . 
 
  “ Do Fitzwilliam certainly leave Kent on Saturday ? ” said Elizabeth . 
 
  “ Yes — if Fitzwilliam does not put it off again . But Fitzwilliam am at Fitzwilliam disposal . Fitzwilliam arranges the business just as Fitzwilliam pleases . ” 
 
  “ And if not able to please Fitzwilliam in the arrangement , Fitzwilliam has at least pleasure in the great power of choice . Elizabeth do not know anybody who seems more to enjoy the power of doing what Fitzwilliam likes than Fitzwilliam . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam likes to have Fitzwilliam own way very well , ” replied Fitzwilliam . “ But so we all do . It is only that Fitzwilliam has better means of having Fitzwilliam own way than many others , because Fitzwilliam is rich , and many others are poor . Fitzwilliam speak feelingly . A younger son , you know , must be inured to self - denial and dependence . ” 
 
  “ In Fitzwilliam opinion , the younger son of an earl can know very little of either . Now seriously , what have Fitzwilliam ever known of self - denial and dependence ? When have Fitzwilliam been prevented by want of money from going wherever Fitzwilliam chose , or procuring anything Fitzwilliam had a fancy for ? ” 
 
  “ These are home questions — and perhaps Fitzwilliam can not say that Fitzwilliam have experienced many hardships of that nature . But in matters of greater weight , Fitzwilliam may suffer from want of money . Younger sons can not marry where Younger sons like . ” 
 
  “ Unless where Younger sons like women of fortune , which Fitzwilliam think Younger sons very often do . ” 
 
  “ Our habits of expense make Our too dependent , and there are not many in Fitzwilliam rank of life who can afford to marry without some attention to money . ” 
 
  “ Is this , ” thought Elizabeth , “ meant for Elizabeth ? ” and Elizabeth coloured at the idea ; but , recovering Elizabeth , said in a lively tone , “ And pray , what is the usual price of an earl ’s younger son ? Unless the elder brother is very sickly , Elizabeth suppose Fitzwilliam would not ask above fifty thousand pounds . ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam answered Elizabeth in the same style , and the subject dropped . To interrupt a silence which might make Fitzwilliam fancy Elizabeth affected with what had passed , Elizabeth soon afterwards said : 
 
  “ Elizabeth imagine Fitzwilliam cousin brought Fitzwilliam down with Fitzwilliam chiefly for the sake of having someone at Fitzwilliam disposal . Elizabeth wonder Fitzwilliam does not marry , to secure a lasting convenience of that kind . But , perhaps , Fitzwilliam sister does as well for the present , and , as Fitzwilliam sister is under Fitzwilliam sole care , Fitzwilliam may do what Fitzwilliam likes with Fitzwilliam sister . ” 
 
  “ No , ” said Fitzwilliam , “ that is an advantage which Fitzwilliam must divide with Fitzwilliam . Fitzwilliam am joined with Fitzwilliam in the guardianship of Georgiana . ” 
 
  “ Are Fitzwilliam indeed ? And pray what sort of guardians do Fitzwilliam make ? Does Fitzwilliam charge give Fitzwilliam much trouble ? Young ladies of Fitzwilliam charge age are sometimes a little difficult to manage , and if Fitzwilliam charge has the true Darcy spirit , Fitzwilliam charge may like to have Fitzwilliam charge own way . ” 
 
  As Elizabeth spoke Elizabeth observed Fitzwilliam looking at Elizabeth earnestly ; and the manner in which Fitzwilliam immediately asked Elizabeth why Elizabeth supposed Georgiana likely to give them any uneasiness , convinced Elizabeth that Elizabeth had somehow or other got pretty near the truth . Elizabeth directly replied : 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam need not be frightened . Elizabeth never heard any harm of Georgiana ; and Elizabeth dare say Georgiana is one of the most tractable creatures in the world . Georgiana is a very great favourite with some ladies of Elizabeth acquaintance , Mrs. Hurst and Caroline . Elizabeth think Elizabeth have heard Fitzwilliam say that Fitzwilliam know some ladies of Elizabeth acquaintance , Mrs. Hurst and Caroline . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam know some ladies of Elizabeth acquaintance , Mrs. Hurst and Caroline a little . some ladies of Elizabeth acquaintance , Mrs. Hurst and Caroline brother is a pleasant gentlemanlike man — some ladies of Elizabeth acquaintance , Mrs. Hurst and Caroline brother is a great friend of Fitzwilliam ’s . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! yes , ” said Elizabeth drily ; “ Fitzwilliam is uncommonly kind to Charles , and takes a prodigious deal of care of Charles . ” 
 
  “ Care of Charles ! Yes , Fitzwilliam really believe Fitzwilliam does take care of Charles in those points where Charles most wants care . From something that Fitzwilliam told Fitzwilliam in their journey hither , Fitzwilliam have reason to think Charles very much indebted to Fitzwilliam . But Fitzwilliam ought to beg Fitzwilliam pardon , for Fitzwilliam have no right to suppose that Charles was the person meant . It was all conjecture . ” 
 
  “ What is it Fitzwilliam mean ? ” 
 
  “ It is a circumstance which Fitzwilliam could not wish to be generally known , because if it were to get round to the lady ’s family , it would be an unpleasant thing . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth may depend upon Fitzwilliam not mentioning it . ” 
 
  “ And remember that Fitzwilliam have not much reason for supposing it to be Charles . What Fitzwilliam told Fitzwilliam was merely this : that Fitzwilliam congratulated Fitzwilliam on having lately saved a friend from the inconveniences of a most imprudent marriage , but without mentioning names or any other particulars , and Fitzwilliam only suspected it to be Charles from believing Charles the kind of young man to get into a scrape of that sort , and from knowing them to have been together the whole of last summer . ” 
 
  “ Did Fitzwilliam give Fitzwilliam reasons for this interference ? ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam understood that there were some very strong objections against the lady ’s . ” 
 
  “ And what arts did Fitzwilliam use to separate them ? ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam did not talk to Fitzwilliam of Fitzwilliam own arts , ” said Fitzwilliam , smiling . “ Fitzwilliam only told Fitzwilliam what Fitzwilliam have now told Elizabeth . ” 
 
  Elizabeth made no answer , and walked on , Elizabeth heart swelling with indignation . After watching Elizabeth a little , Fitzwilliam asked Elizabeth why Elizabeth was so thoughtful . 
 
  “ Elizabeth am thinking of what Fitzwilliam have been telling Elizabeth , ” said Elizabeth . “ Fitzwilliam cousin ’s conduct does not suit Elizabeth feelings . Why was Fitzwilliam to be the judge ? ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth are rather disposed to call Fitzwilliam interference officious ? ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth do not see what right Fitzwilliam had to decide on the propriety of the lady ’s inclination , or why , upon Fitzwilliam own judgement alone , Fitzwilliam was to determine and direct in what manner the lady ’s was to be happy . But , ” Elizabeth continued , recollecting Elizabeth , “ as we know none of the particulars , it is not fair to condemn Fitzwilliam . It is not to be supposed that there was much affection in the case . ” 
 
  “ That is not an unnatural surmise , ” said Fitzwilliam , “ but That is a lessening of the honour of Fitzwilliam cousin ’s triumph very sadly . ” 
 
  This was spoken jestingly ; but it appeared to Elizabeth so just a picture of Fitzwilliam , that Elizabeth would not trust Elizabeth with an answer , and therefore , abruptly changing the conversation talked on indifferent matters until their reached the Parsonage . There , shut into Elizabeth own room , as soon as Fitzwilliam left their , Elizabeth could think without interruption of all that Elizabeth had heard . It was not to be supposed that any other people could be meant than those with whom Elizabeth was connected . There could not exist in the world two men over whom Fitzwilliam could have such boundless influence . That Fitzwilliam had been concerned in the measures taken to separate Charles and Jane ’s Elizabeth had never doubted ; but Elizabeth had always attributed to Caroline the principal design and arrangement of the measures taken to separate Charles and Jane ’s . If Caroline own vanity , however , did not mislead Caroline , Caroline was the cause , Caroline pride and caprice were the cause , of all that Jane ’s had suffered , and still continued to suffer . Caroline had ruined for a while every hope of happiness for the most affectionate , generous heart in the world ; and no one could say how lasting an evil Caroline might have inflicted . 
 
  “ There were some very strong objections against the lady ’s , ” were Fitzwilliam words ; and some very strong objections against the lady ’s probably were , the lady ’s having one uncle who was a country attorney , and another who was in business in London . 
 
  “ To Jane ’s , ” Fitzwilliam exclaimed , “ there could be no possibility of objection ; all loveliness and goodness as the lady ’s is!—her understanding excellent , the lady ’s mind improved , and the lady ’s manners captivating . Neither could anything be urged against Fitzwilliam father , who , though with some peculiarities , has abilities Fitzwilliam Fitzwilliam need not disdain , and respectability which Fitzwilliam will probably never reach . ” When Elizabeth thought of Elizabeth mother , Elizabeth confidence gave way a little ; but Elizabeth would not allow that any objections there had material weight with Fitzwilliam , whose pride , Elizabeth was convinced , would receive a deeper wound from the want of importance in the lady ’s connections , than from the lady ’s connections want of sense ; and Elizabeth was quite decided , at last , that Fitzwilliam had been partly governed by this worst kind of pride , and partly by the wish of retaining Charles for Fitzwilliam sister . 
 
  The agitation and tears which the subject occasioned , brought on a headache ; and a headache grew so much worse towards the evening , that , added to Elizabeth unwillingness to see Fitzwilliam , a headache determined Elizabeth not to attend Elizabeth cousins to Rosings , where Elizabeth cousins were engaged to drink tea . Mrs. Collins ’s , seeing that Elizabeth was really unwell , did not press Elizabeth to go and as much as possible prevented Elizabeth husband from pressing Elizabeth ; but Elizabeth husband could not conceal Elizabeth husband apprehension of Cathleen ’s being rather displeased by Elizabeth staying at home . 
 Chapter 
 
  When they were gone , Elizabeth , as if intending to exasperate Elizabeth as much as possible against Fitzwilliam , chose for Elizabeth employment the examination of all the letters which Jane had written to Elizabeth since Jane being in Kent . all the letters which Jane had written to Elizabeth since Jane being in Kent contained no actual complaint , nor was there any revival of past occurrences , or any communication of present suffering . But in all , and in almost every line of each , there was a want of that cheerfulness which had been used to characterise Jane style , and which , proceeding from the serenity of a mind at ease with a mind at ease with and kindly disposed towards everyone , had been scarcely ever clouded . Elizabeth noticed every sentence conveying the idea of uneasiness , with an attention which every sentence conveying the idea of uneasiness had hardly received on the first perusal . Fitzwilliam ’s shameful boast of what misery Fitzwilliam had been able to inflict , gave Elizabeth a keener sense of Elizabeth sister ’s sufferings . It was some consolation to think that Fitzwilliam visit to Rosings was to end on the day after the next — and , a still greater , that in less than a fortnight Elizabeth should Elizabeth be with Jane again , and enabled to contribute to the recovery of Jane spirits , by all that affection could do . 
 
  Elizabeth could not think of Fitzwilliam ’s leaving Kent without remembering that Fitzwilliam cousin was to go with Fitzwilliam ; but Fitzwilliam had made it clear that Fitzwilliam had no intentions at all , and agreeable as Fitzwilliam was , Elizabeth did not mean to be unhappy about Fitzwilliam . 
 
  While settling this point , Elizabeth was suddenly roused by the sound of the door - bell , and Elizabeth spirits were a little fluttered by the idea of the door - bell being Fitzwilliam . But the idea of the door - bell being Fitzwilliam was soon banished , and Elizabeth spirits were very differently affected , when , to Elizabeth utter amazement , Elizabeth saw Fitzwilliam walk into the room . In an hurried manner Fitzwilliam immediately began an enquiry after Elizabeth health , imputing Fitzwilliam visit to a wish of hearing that Elizabeth were better . Elizabeth answered Fitzwilliam with cold civility . Fitzwilliam sat down for a few moments , and then getting up , walked about the room . Elizabeth was surprised , but said not a word . After a silence of several minutes , Fitzwilliam came towards Elizabeth in an agitated manner , and thus began : 
 
  “ In vain Fitzwilliam have struggled . It will not do . Fitzwilliam feelings will not be repressed . Elizabeth must allow Fitzwilliam to tell Elizabeth how ardently Fitzwilliam admire and love Elizabeth . ” 
 
  Elizabeth ’s astonishment was beyond expression . Elizabeth stared , coloured , doubted , and was silent . tell Fitzwilliam considered sufficient encouragement ; and the avowal of all that Fitzwilliam felt , and had long felt for Elizabeth , immediately followed . Fitzwilliam spoke well ; but there were feelings besides those of the heart to be detailed ; and Fitzwilliam was not more eloquent on the subject of tenderness than of pride . Fitzwilliam sense of Elizabeth inferiority — of Elizabeth inferiority being a degradation — of the family obstacles which had always opposed to inclination , were dwelt on with a warmth which seemed due to the consequence Fitzwilliam was wounding , but was very unlikely to recommend Fitzwilliam suit . 
 
  In spite of Elizabeth deeply - rooted dislike , Elizabeth could not be insensible to the compliment of such a man ’s affection , and though Elizabeth intentions did not vary for an instant , Elizabeth was at first sorry for the pain Fitzwilliam was to receive ; till , roused to resentment by Fitzwilliam subsequent language , Elizabeth lost all compassion in anger . Elizabeth tried , however , to compose Elizabeth to answer Fitzwilliam with patience , when Fitzwilliam should have done . Fitzwilliam concluded with representing to Elizabeth the strength of that attachment which , in spite of all Fitzwilliam endeavours , Fitzwilliam had found impossible to conquer ; and with expressing Fitzwilliam hope that that attachment which , in spite of all Fitzwilliam endeavours , Fitzwilliam had found impossible to conquer would now be rewarded by Elizabeth acceptance of Fitzwilliam hand . As Fitzwilliam said this , Elizabeth could easily see that Fitzwilliam had no doubt of a favourable answer . Fitzwilliam spoke of apprehension and anxiety , but Fitzwilliam countenance expressed real security . Such a circumstance could only exasperate farther , and , when Fitzwilliam ceased , the colour rose into Elizabeth cheeks , and Elizabeth said : 
 
  “ In such cases as this , it is , Elizabeth believe , the established mode to express a sense of obligation for the sentiments avowed , however unequally the sentiments avowed may be returned . It is natural that obligation should be felt , and if Elizabeth could feel gratitude , Elizabeth would now thank Fitzwilliam . But Elizabeth cannot — Elizabeth have never desired Fitzwilliam good opinion , and Fitzwilliam have certainly bestowed Fitzwilliam good opinion most unwillingly . Elizabeth am sorry to have occasioned pain to anyone . occasioned has been most unconsciously done , however , and Elizabeth hope will be of short duration . The feelings which , Fitzwilliam tell Elizabeth , have long prevented the acknowledgment of Fitzwilliam regard , can have little difficulty in overcoming it after this explanation . ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam , who was leaning against the mantelpiece with Fitzwilliam eyes fixed on Elizabeth face , seemed to catch Elizabeth words with no less resentment than surprise . Fitzwilliam complexion became pale with anger , and the disturbance of Fitzwilliam mind was visible in every feature . Fitzwilliam was struggling for the appearance of composure , and would not open Fitzwilliam lips till Fitzwilliam believed Fitzwilliam to have attained the appearance of composure . The pause was to Elizabeth ’s feelings dreadful . At length , with a voice of forced calmness , Fitzwilliam said : 
 
  “ And this is all the reply which Fitzwilliam am to have the honour of expecting ! Fitzwilliam might , perhaps , wish to be informed why , with so little endeavour at civility , Fitzwilliam am thus rejected . But it is of small importance . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth might as well enquire , ” replied Elizabeth , “ why with so evident a desire of offending and insulting Elizabeth , Fitzwilliam chose to tell Elizabeth that Fitzwilliam liked Elizabeth against Fitzwilliam will , against Fitzwilliam reason , and even against Fitzwilliam character ? Was not tell some excuse for incivility , if Elizabeth was uncivil ? But Elizabeth have other provocations . Fitzwilliam know Elizabeth have . Had not Elizabeth feelings decided against Fitzwilliam — had Elizabeth feelings been indifferent , or had Elizabeth feelings even been favourable , do Fitzwilliam think that any consideration would tempt Elizabeth to accept Elizabeth ? ” 
 
  As Elizabeth pronounced these words , Fitzwilliam changed colour ; but changed was short , and Fitzwilliam listened without attempting to interrupt Elizabeth while Elizabeth continued : 
 
  “ Elizabeth have every reason in the world to think ill of Fitzwilliam . No motive can excuse the unjust and ungenerous part Fitzwilliam acted there . Fitzwilliam dare not , Fitzwilliam can not deny , that Fitzwilliam have been the principal , if not the only means of dividing them from each other — of exposing one to the censure of the world for caprice and instability , and the other to the world derision for disappointed hopes , and involving them both in misery of the acutest kind . ” 
 
  Elizabeth paused , and saw with no slight indignation that Fitzwilliam was listening with an air which proved Fitzwilliam wholly unmoved by any feeling of remorse . Fitzwilliam even looked at Elizabeth with a smile of affected incredulity . 
 
  “ Can Fitzwilliam deny that Fitzwilliam have done it ? ” Elizabeth repeated . 
 
  With assumed tranquillity Fitzwilliam then replied : “ Fitzwilliam have no wish of denying that Fitzwilliam did everything in Fitzwilliam power to separate Fitzwilliam friend from a most beloved sister , or that Fitzwilliam rejoice in Fitzwilliam success . Towards Fitzwilliam Fitzwilliam have been kinder than towards Fitzwilliam . ” 
 
  Elizabeth disdained the appearance of noticing this civil reflection , but this civil reflection meaning did not escape , nor was this civil reflection likely to conciliate Elizabeth . 
 
  “ But it is not merely this affair , ” Elizabeth continued , “ on which Elizabeth dislike is founded . Long before this civil reflection had taken place Elizabeth opinion of Fitzwilliam was decided . Fitzwilliam character was unfolded in the recital which Elizabeth received many months ago from Charlie . On this subject , what can Fitzwilliam have to say ? In what imaginary act of friendship can Fitzwilliam here defend Fitzwilliam ? or under what misrepresentation can Fitzwilliam here impose upon others ? ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth take an eager interest in Fitzwilliam concerns , ” said Fitzwilliam , in a less tranquil tone , and with a heightened colour . 
 
  “ Who that knows what Fitzwilliam misfortunes have been , can help feeling an interest in Fitzwilliam ? ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam misfortunes ! ” repeated Fitzwilliam contemptuously ; “ yes , Fitzwilliam misfortunes have been great indeed . ” 
 
  “ And of Fitzwilliam infliction , ” cried Elizabeth with energy . “ Fitzwilliam have reduced Fitzwilliam to Fitzwilliam present state of poverty — comparative poverty . Fitzwilliam have withheld the advantages which Fitzwilliam must know to have been designed for Fitzwilliam . Fitzwilliam have deprived the best years of Fitzwilliam life of that independence which was no less Fitzwilliam due than Fitzwilliam desert . Fitzwilliam have done all this ! and yet Fitzwilliam can treat the mention of Fitzwilliam misfortunes with contempt and ridicule . ” 
 
  “ And this , ” cried Fitzwilliam , as Fitzwilliam walked with quick steps across the room , “ is Elizabeth opinion of Fitzwilliam ! This is the estimation in which Elizabeth hold Fitzwilliam ! Fitzwilliam thank Elizabeth for explaining it so fully . Fitzwilliam faults , according to this calculation , are heavy indeed ! But perhaps , ” added Fitzwilliam , stopping in Fitzwilliam walk , and turning towards Elizabeth , “ Fitzwilliam faults might have been overlooked , had not Elizabeth pride been hurt by Fitzwilliam honest confession of the scruples that had long prevented Fitzwilliam forming any serious design . These bitter accusations might have been suppressed , had Fitzwilliam , with greater policy , concealed Fitzwilliam struggles , and flattered Elizabeth into the belief of Fitzwilliam being impelled by unqualified , unalloyed inclination ; by reason , by reflection , by everything . But disguise of every sort is Fitzwilliam abhorrence . Nor am Fitzwilliam ashamed of the feelings Fitzwilliam related . the feelings Fitzwilliam related were natural and just . Could Elizabeth expect Fitzwilliam to rejoice in the inferiority of Elizabeth connections?—to congratulate Fitzwilliam on the hope of relations , whose condition in life is so decidedly beneath Fitzwilliam own ? ” 
 
  Elizabeth felt Elizabeth growing more angry every moment ; yet Elizabeth tried to the utmost to speak with composure when Elizabeth said : 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam are mistaken , Fitzwilliam , if Fitzwilliam suppose that the mode of Fitzwilliam declaration affected Elizabeth in any other way , than as the mode of Fitzwilliam declaration spared Elizabeth the concern which Elizabeth might have felt in refusing Fitzwilliam , had Fitzwilliam behaved in a more gentlemanlike manner . ” 
 
  Elizabeth saw Fitzwilliam start at this , but Fitzwilliam said nothing , and Elizabeth continued : 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam could not have made the offer of Fitzwilliam hand in any possible way that would have tempted Elizabeth to accept the offer of Fitzwilliam hand . ” 
 
  Again Fitzwilliam astonishment was obvious ; and Fitzwilliam looked at Elizabeth with an expression of mingled incredulity and mortification . Elizabeth went on : 
 
  “ From the very beginning — from the first moment , Elizabeth may almost say — of Elizabeth acquaintance with Fitzwilliam , Fitzwilliam manners , impressing Elizabeth with the fullest belief of Fitzwilliam arrogance , Fitzwilliam conceit , and Fitzwilliam selfish disdain of the feelings of others , were such as to form the groundwork of disapprobation on which succeeding events have built so immovable a dislike ; and Elizabeth had not known Fitzwilliam a month before Elizabeth felt that Fitzwilliam were the last man in the world whom Elizabeth could ever be prevailed on to marry . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth have said quite enough , Elizabeth . Fitzwilliam perfectly comprehend Elizabeth feelings , and have now only to be ashamed of what Fitzwilliam own have been . Forgive Fitzwilliam for having taken up so much of Elizabeth time , and accept Fitzwilliam best wishes for Elizabeth health and happiness . ” 
 
  And with these words Fitzwilliam hastily left the room , and Elizabeth heard Fitzwilliam the next moment open the front door and quit the house . 
 
  The tumult of Elizabeth mind , was now painfully great . Elizabeth knew not how to support Elizabeth , and from actual weakness sat down and cried for half - an - hour . Elizabeth astonishment , as Elizabeth reflected on what had passed , was increased by every review of it . That Elizabeth should receive an offer of marriage from Fitzwilliam ! That Fitzwilliam should have been in love with Elizabeth for so many months ! So much in love as to wish to marry Elizabeth in spite of all the objections which had made Fitzwilliam prevent Fitzwilliam marrying Fitzwilliam sister , and which must appear at least with equal force in Fitzwilliam own case — was almost incredible ! It was gratifying to have inspired unconsciously so strong an affection . But Fitzwilliam pride , Fitzwilliam abominable pride — Fitzwilliam shameless avowal of what Fitzwilliam had done with respect to Jane — Fitzwilliam unpardonable assurance in acknowledging , though Fitzwilliam could not justify it , and the unfeeling manner in which Fitzwilliam had mentioned Charlie , Fitzwilliam cruelty towards whom Fitzwilliam had not attempted to deny , soon overcame the pity which the consideration of Fitzwilliam attachment had for a moment excited . Elizabeth continued in very agitated reflections till the sound of Cathleen ’s carriage made Elizabeth feel how unequal Elizabeth was to encounter Charlie observation , and hurried Elizabeth away to Elizabeth room . 
 Chapter 
 
  Elizabeth awoke the next morning to the same thoughts and meditations which had at length closed Elizabeth eyes . Elizabeth could not yet recover from the surprise of what had happened ; it was impossible to think of anything else ; and , totally indisposed for employment , Elizabeth resolved , soon after breakfast , to indulge Elizabeth in air and exercise . Elizabeth was proceeding directly to Elizabeth favourite walk , when the recollection of Fitzwilliam ’s sometimes coming there stopped Elizabeth , and instead of entering the park , Elizabeth turned up the lane , which led farther from the turnpike - road . The park paling was still the boundary on one side , and Elizabeth soon passed one of the gates into the ground . 
 
  After walking two or three times along that part of the lane , which led farther from the turnpike - road , Elizabeth was tempted , by the pleasantness of the morning , to stop at the gates and look into the park . The five weeks which Elizabeth had now passed in Kent had made a great difference in the country , and every day was adding to the verdure of the early trees . Elizabeth was on the point of continuing Elizabeth walk , when Elizabeth caught a glimpse of a gentleman within the sort of grove which edged the park ; a gentleman was moving that way ; and , fearful of its being Fitzwilliam ’s , Elizabeth was directly retreating . But a gentleman was now near enough to see Elizabeth , and stepping forward with eagerness , pronounced Elizabeth name . Elizabeth had turned away ; but on hearing Elizabeth called , though in a voice which proved it to be Fitzwilliam ’s , Elizabeth moved again towards the gates . a gentleman had by that time reached the gates also , and , holding out a letter , which Elizabeth instinctively took , said , with a look of haughty composure , “ a gentleman have been walking in the sort of grove which edged the park some time in the hope of meeting Elizabeth . Will Elizabeth do a gentleman the honour of reading a letter , which Elizabeth instinctively took ? ” And then , with a slight bow , turned again into the plantation , and was soon out of sight . 
 
  With no expectation of pleasure , but with the strongest curiosity , Elizabeth opened a letter , which Elizabeth instinctively took , and , to Elizabeth still increasing wonder , perceived an envelope containing two sheets of letter - paper , written quite through , in a very close hand . an envelope containing two sheets of letter - paper , written quite through , in a very close hand an envelope containing two sheets of letter - paper , written quite through , in a very close hand was likewise full . Pursuing Elizabeth way along the lane , which led farther from the turnpike - road , Elizabeth then began it . a letter , which Elizabeth instinctively took was dated from Rosings , at eight o’clock in the morning , and was as follows : — 
 
  “ Be not alarmed , Elizabeth , on receiving a letter , which Elizabeth instinctively took , by the apprehension of a letter , which Elizabeth instinctively took containing any repetition of those sentiments or renewal of those offers which were last night so disgusting to Elizabeth . Elizabeth write without any intention of paining Elizabeth , or humbling Elizabeth , by dwelling on wishes which , for the happiness of both , can not be too soon forgotten ; and the effort which the formation and the perusal of a letter , which Elizabeth instinctively took must occasion , should have been spared , had not Elizabeth character required a letter , which Elizabeth instinctively took to be written and read . Elizabeth must , therefore , pardon the freedom with which Elizabeth demand Elizabeth attention ; Elizabeth feelings , Elizabeth know , will bestow Elizabeth attention unwillingly , but Elizabeth demand Elizabeth attention of Elizabeth justice . 
 
  “ Two offenses of a very different nature , and by no means of equal magnitude , Elizabeth last night laid to Elizabeth charge . The first mentioned was , that , regardless of the sentiments of either , Elizabeth had detached Charles from Elizabeth sister , and the other , that Elizabeth had , in defiance of various claims , in defiance of honour and humanity , ruined the immediate prosperity and blasted the prospects of Elizabeth sister . Wilfully and wantonly to have thrown off the companion of Elizabeth youth , the acknowledged favourite of Elizabeth father , a young man who had scarcely any other dependence than on our patronage , and who had been brought up to expect its exertion , would be a depravity , to which the separation of two young persons , whose affection could be the growth of only a few weeks , could bear no comparison . But from the severity of that blame which was last night so liberally bestowed , respecting each circumstance , Elizabeth shall hope to be in the future secured , when the following account of Elizabeth actions and Elizabeth actions motives has been read . If , in the explanation of Elizabeth actions , which is due to Elizabeth , Elizabeth am under the necessity of relating feelings which may be offensive to Elizabeth , Elizabeth can only say that Elizabeth am sorry . The necessity must be obeyed , and further apology would be absurd . 
 
  “ Elizabeth had not been long in Hertfordshire , before Elizabeth saw , in common with others , that Charles preferred Elizabeth sister to any other young woman in the country . But it was not till the evening of the dance at Netherfield that Elizabeth had any apprehension of Charles feeling a serious attachment . Elizabeth had often seen Charles in love before . At the dance at Netherfield , while Elizabeth had the honour of dancing with Elizabeth , Elizabeth was first made acquainted , by Sir William Lucas ’s accidental information , that Charles ’s attentions to Elizabeth sister had given rise to a general expectation of their marriage . Sir William Lucas ’s spoke of their marriage as a certain event , of which the time alone could be undecided . From that moment Elizabeth observed Sir William Lucas ’s behaviour attentively ; and Elizabeth could then perceive that Sir William Lucas ’s partiality for Elizabeth sister was beyond what Elizabeth had ever witnessed in Sir William Lucas ’s . Elizabeth sister Elizabeth also watched . Elizabeth sister look and manners were open , cheerful , and engaging as ever , but without any symptom of peculiar regard , and Elizabeth remained convinced from the evening ’s scrutiny , that though Elizabeth sister received Sir William Lucas ’s attentions with pleasure , Elizabeth sister did not invite Sir William Lucas ’s attentions by any participation of sentiment . If Elizabeth have not been mistaken here , Elizabeth must have been in error . Elizabeth superior knowledge of Elizabeth sister must make the latter probable . If it be so , if Elizabeth have been misled by such error to inflict pain on Elizabeth sister , Elizabeth resentment has not been unreasonable . But Elizabeth shall not scruple to assert , that the serenity of Elizabeth sister ’s countenance and air was such as might have given the most acute observer a conviction that , however amiable Elizabeth sister temper , Elizabeth sister heart was not likely to be easily touched . That Elizabeth was desirous of believing Elizabeth sister indifferent is certain — but Elizabeth will venture to say that Elizabeth investigation and decisions are not usually influenced by Elizabeth hopes or fears . Elizabeth did not believe Elizabeth sister to be indifferent because Elizabeth wished be ; Elizabeth believed be on impartial conviction , as truly as Elizabeth wished be in reason . Elizabeth objections to their marriage were not merely those which Elizabeth last night acknowledged to have required the utmost force of passion to put aside , in Elizabeth own case ; the want of connection could not be so great an evil to Sir William Lucas ’s as to Elizabeth . But there were other causes of repugnance ; causes which , though still existing , and existing to an equal degree in both instances , Elizabeth had Elizabeth endeavoured to forget , because other causes of repugnance were not immediately before Elizabeth . other causes of repugnance must be stated , though briefly . The situation of Elizabeth mother ’s family , though objectionable , was nothing in comparison to that total want of propriety so frequently , so almost uniformly betrayed by Elizabeth mother ’s , by Elizabeth three younger sisters , and occasionally even by Elizabeth father . Pardon Elizabeth . It pains Elizabeth to offend Elizabeth . But amidst Elizabeth concern for the defects of Elizabeth nearest relations , and Elizabeth displeasure at this representation of Elizabeth nearest relations , let it give Elizabeth consolation to consider that , to have conducted Elizabeth so as to avoid any share of the like censure , is praise no less generally bestowed on Elizabeth and Elizabeth sister , than it is honourable to the sense and disposition of Elizabeth . Elizabeth will only say farther that from what passed that evening , Elizabeth opinion of all parties was confirmed , and every inducement heightened which could have led Elizabeth before , to preserve Sir William Lucas ’s from what Elizabeth esteemed a most unhappy connection . Sir William Lucas ’s left Netherfield for London , on the day following , as Elizabeth , Elizabeth am certain , remember , with the design of soon returning . 
 
  “ The part which Elizabeth acted is now to be explained . Sir William Lucas ’s sisters ’ uneasiness had been equally excited with Elizabeth own ; our coincidence of feeling was soon discovered , and , alike sensible that no time was to be lost in detaching Sir William Lucas ’s sisters ’ brother , we shortly resolved on joining Sir William Lucas ’s directly in London . We accordingly went — and there Elizabeth readily engaged in the office of pointing out to Elizabeth friend the certain evils of such a choice . Elizabeth described , and enforced the certain evils of such a choice earnestly . But , however this remonstrance might have staggered or delayed Sir William Lucas ’s determination , Elizabeth do not suppose that this remonstrance would ultimately have prevented their marriage , had this remonstrance not been seconded by the assurance that Elizabeth hesitated not in giving , of Elizabeth sister ’s indifference . Sir William Lucas ’s had before believed Elizabeth sister to return Sir William Lucas ’s affection with sincere , if not with equal regard . But Charles has great natural modesty , with a stronger dependence on Elizabeth judgement than on Sir William Lucas ’s own . To convince Sir William Lucas ’s , therefore , that Sir William Lucas ’s had deceived Sir William Lucas ’s , was no very difficult point . To persuade Sir William Lucas ’s against returning into Hertfordshire , when that conviction had been given , was scarcely the work of a moment . Elizabeth can not blame Elizabeth for having done thus much . There is but one part of Elizabeth conduct in the whole affair on which Elizabeth do not reflect with satisfaction ; but one part of Elizabeth conduct in the whole affair on which Elizabeth do not reflect with satisfaction is that Elizabeth condescended to adopt the measures of art so far as to conceal from Sir William Lucas ’s Elizabeth sister ’s being in town . Elizabeth knew Elizabeth sister ’s being in town Elizabeth , as Elizabeth sister ’s being in town was known to Caroline ; but Caroline brother is even yet ignorant of Elizabeth sister ’s being in town . That they might have met without ill consequence is perhaps probable ; but Sir William Lucas ’s regard did not appear to Elizabeth enough extinguished for Sir William Lucas ’s to see Elizabeth sister without some danger . Perhaps this concealment , this disguise was beneath Elizabeth ; this concealment , this disguise is done , however , and this concealment , this disguise was done for the best . On this subject Elizabeth have nothing more to say , no other apology to offer . If Elizabeth have wounded Elizabeth sister ’s feelings , wounded was unknowingly done and though the motives which governed Elizabeth may to Elizabeth very naturally appear insufficient , Elizabeth have not yet learnt to condemn the motives which governed Elizabeth . 
 
  “ With respect to that other , more weighty accusation , of having injured Elizabeth sister , Elizabeth can only refute that other , more weighty accusation , of having injured Elizabeth sister by laying before Elizabeth the whole of Elizabeth sister connection with Elizabeth family . Of what Elizabeth sister has particularly accused Elizabeth Elizabeth am ignorant ; but of the truth of what Elizabeth shall relate , Elizabeth can summon more than one witness of undoubted veracity . 
 
  “ Elizabeth sister is the son of a very respectable man , who had for many years the management of all the Pemberley estates , and whose good conduct in the discharge of his trust naturally inclined Elizabeth father to be of service to his ; and on George , who was his godson , his kindness was therefore liberally bestowed . Elizabeth father supported Elizabeth sister at school , and afterwards at Cambridge — most important assistance , as Elizabeth sister own father , always poor from the extravagance of Elizabeth sister , would have been unable to give Elizabeth sister a gentleman ’s education . Elizabeth father was not only fond of Elizabeth sister society , whose manners were always engaging ; Elizabeth father had also the highest opinion of Elizabeth sister , and hoping the church would be Elizabeth sister profession , intended to provide for Elizabeth sister in the church . As for Elizabeth , it is many , many years since Elizabeth first began to think of Elizabeth sister in a very different manner . The vicious propensities — the want of principle , which Elizabeth sister was careful to guard from the knowledge of Elizabeth sister best friend , could not escape the observation of a young man of nearly the same age with Elizabeth sister , and who had opportunities of seeing Elizabeth sister in unguarded moments , which Fitzwilliam ’s could not have . Here again Elizabeth shall give Elizabeth pain — to what degree Elizabeth only can tell . But whatever may be the sentiments which Elizabeth sister has created , a suspicion of the sentiments which Elizabeth sister has created nature shall not prevent Elizabeth from unfolding Elizabeth sister real character — it adds even another motive . 
 
  “ Elizabeth excellent father died about five years ago ; and Elizabeth father attachment to Elizabeth sister was to the last so steady , that in Elizabeth father will Elizabeth father particularly recommended it to Elizabeth , to promote Elizabeth sister advancement in the best manner that Elizabeth sister profession might allow — and if Elizabeth sister took orders , desired that a valuable family living might be Elizabeth sister as soon as a valuable family living became vacant . There was also a legacy of one thousand pounds . Elizabeth father did not long survive Elizabeth , and within half a year from these events , Elizabeth sister wrote to inform Elizabeth that , having finally resolved against taking orders , Elizabeth sister hoped Elizabeth should not think it unreasonable for Elizabeth sister to expect some more immediate pecuniary advantage , in lieu of the preferment , by which Elizabeth sister could not be benefited . Elizabeth sister had some intention , Elizabeth sister added , of studying law , and Elizabeth must be aware that the interest of one thousand pounds would be a very insufficient support therein . Elizabeth rather wished , than believed Elizabeth sister to be sincere ; but , at any rate , was perfectly ready to accede to Elizabeth sister proposal . Elizabeth knew that Elizabeth sister ought not to be a clergyman ; the business was therefore soon settled — Elizabeth sister resigned all claim to assistance in the church , were it possible that Elizabeth sister could ever be in a situation to receive assistance in the church , and accepted in return three thousand pounds . All connection between us seemed now dissolved . Elizabeth thought too ill of Elizabeth sister to invite Elizabeth sister to Pemberley , or admit Elizabeth sister society in town . In town Elizabeth believe Elizabeth sister chiefly lived , but Elizabeth sister studying the law was a mere pretence , and being now free from all restraint , Elizabeth sister life was a life of idleness and dissipation . For about three years Elizabeth heard little of Elizabeth sister ; but on the decease of the incumbent of the living which had been designed for Elizabeth sister , Elizabeth sister applied to Elizabeth again by letter for the presentation . Elizabeth sister circumstances , Elizabeth sister assured Elizabeth , and Elizabeth had no difficulty in believing it , were exceedingly bad . Elizabeth sister had found the law a most unprofitable study , and was now absolutely resolved on being ordained , if Elizabeth would present Elizabeth sister to the living in question — of which Elizabeth sister trusted there could be little doubt , as Elizabeth sister was well assured that Elizabeth had no other person to provide for , and Elizabeth could not have forgotten Elizabeth revered father ’s intentions . Elizabeth will hardly blame Elizabeth for refusing to comply with this entreaty , or for resisting every repetition to this entreaty . Elizabeth sister resentment was in proportion to the distress of Elizabeth sister circumstances — and Elizabeth sister was doubtless as violent in Elizabeth sister abuse of Elizabeth to others as in Elizabeth sister reproaches to Elizabeth . After this period every appearance of acquaintance was dropped . How Elizabeth sister lived Elizabeth know not . But last summer Elizabeth sister was again most painfully obtruded on Elizabeth notice . 
 
  “ Elizabeth must now mention a circumstance which Elizabeth would wish to forget Elizabeth , and which no obligation less than the present should induce Elizabeth to unfold to any human being . Having said thus much , Elizabeth feel no doubt of Elizabeth secrecy . Elizabeth sister , who is more than ten years Elizabeth junior , was left to the guardianship of Elizabeth mother ’s nephew , Fitzwilam , and Elizabeth . About a year ago , Elizabeth sister , who is more than ten years Elizabeth junior was taken from school , and an establishment formed for Elizabeth sister , who is more than ten years Elizabeth junior in London ; and last summer Elizabeth sister , who is more than ten years Elizabeth junior went with the lady who presided over an establishment , to Ramsgate ; and thither also went Elizabeth sister , undoubtedly by design ; for there proved to have been a prior acquaintance between Elizabeth sister and the lady who presided over an establishment ; and by the lady who presided over an establishment connivance and aid , Elizabeth sister so far recommended Elizabeth sister to Georgiana , whose affectionate heart retained a strong impression of Elizabeth sister kindness to Georgiana , whose affectionate heart retained a strong impression of Elizabeth sister kindness to as a child , that Georgiana , whose affectionate heart retained a strong impression of Elizabeth sister kindness to was persuaded to believe Georgiana , whose affectionate heart retained a strong impression of Elizabeth sister kindness to in love , and to consent to an elopement . Georgiana , whose affectionate heart retained a strong impression of Elizabeth sister kindness to was then but fifteen , which must be Georgiana , whose affectionate heart retained a strong impression of Elizabeth sister kindness to excuse ; and after stating Georgiana , whose affectionate heart retained a strong impression of Elizabeth sister kindness to imprudence , Elizabeth am happy to add , that Elizabeth owed the knowledge of Georgiana , whose affectionate heart retained a strong impression of Elizabeth sister kindness to imprudence to Georgiana , whose affectionate heart retained a strong impression of Elizabeth sister kindness to . Elizabeth joined them unexpectedly a day or two before an elopement , and then Georgiana , whose affectionate heart retained a strong impression of Elizabeth sister kindness to , unable to support the idea of grieving and offending Elizabeth sister , acknowledged the whole to Elizabeth . Elizabeth may imagine what Elizabeth felt and how Elizabeth acted . Regard for Elizabeth sister credit and feelings prevented any public exposure ; but Elizabeth wrote to Elizabeth sister , and the lady who presided over an establishment was of course removed from the lady who presided over an establishment charge . Elizabeth sister chief object was unquestionably Elizabeth sister fortune , which is thirty thousand pounds ; but Elizabeth can not help supposing that the hope of revenging Elizabeth sister on Elizabeth was a strong inducement . Elizabeth sister revenge would have been complete indeed . 
 
  “ a letter , which Elizabeth instinctively took , Elizabeth , is a faithful narrative of every event in which us have been concerned together ; and if Elizabeth do not absolutely reject a letter , which Elizabeth instinctively took as false , Elizabeth will , Elizabeth hope , acquit Elizabeth henceforth of cruelty towards Elizabeth sister . Elizabeth know not in what manner , under what form of falsehood Elizabeth sister had imposed on Elizabeth ; but Elizabeth sister success is not perhaps to be wondered at . Ignorant as Elizabeth previously were of everything concerning either , detection could not be in Elizabeth power , and suspicion certainly not in Elizabeth inclination . 
 
  “ Elizabeth may possibly wonder why all this was not told Elizabeth last night ; but Elizabeth was not then master enough of Elizabeth to know what could or ought to be revealed . For the truth of everything here related , Elizabeth can appeal more particularly to the testimony of Fitzwilam , who , from our near relationship and constant intimacy , and , still more , as one of the executors of Elizabeth father ’s will , has been unavoidably acquainted with every particular of these transactions . If Elizabeth abhorrence of Elizabeth should make Elizabeth assertions valueless , Elizabeth can not be prevented by the same cause from confiding in Elizabeth cousin ; and that there may be the possibility of consulting Elizabeth cousin , Elizabeth shall endeavour to find some opportunity of putting a letter , which Elizabeth instinctively took in Elizabeth hands in the course of the morning . Elizabeth will only add , God bless Elizabeth . 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam ’s ” 
 Chapter 
 
  If Elizabeth , when Fitzwilliam gave Elizabeth the letter , did not expect the letter to contain a renewal of Fitzwilliam offers , Elizabeth had formed no expectation at all of the letter contents . But such as the letter contents were , it may well be supposed how eagerly Elizabeth went through the letter contents , and what a contrariety of emotion the letter contents excited . Elizabeth feelings as Elizabeth read were scarcely to be defined . With amazement did Elizabeth first understand that Fitzwilliam believed any apology to be in Fitzwilliam power ; and steadfastly was Elizabeth persuaded , that Fitzwilliam could have no explanation to give , which a just sense of shame would not conceal . With a strong prejudice against everything Fitzwilliam might say , Elizabeth began Fitzwilliam account of what had happened at Netherfield . Elizabeth read with an eagerness which hardly left Elizabeth power of comprehension , and from impatience of knowing what the next sentence might bring , was incapable of attending to the sense of the one before Elizabeth eyes . Fitzwilliam belief of Elizabeth sister ’s insensibility Elizabeth instantly resolved to be false ; and Fitzwilliam account of the real , the worst objections to the match , made Elizabeth too angry to have any wish of doing Fitzwilliam justice . Fitzwilliam expressed no regret for what Fitzwilliam had done which satisfied Elizabeth ; Fitzwilliam style was not penitent , but haughty . Fitzwilliam style was all pride and insolence . 
 
  But when this subject was succeeded by Fitzwilliam account of Charlie — when Elizabeth read with somewhat clearer attention a relation of events which , if true , must overthrow every cherished opinion of Fitzwilliam worth , and which bore so alarming an affinity to Fitzwilliam own history of Fitzwilliam — Elizabeth feelings were yet more acutely painful and more difficult of definition . Astonishment , apprehension , and even horror , oppressed Elizabeth . Elizabeth wished to discredit Fitzwilliam account of the real , the worst objections to the match entirely , repeatedly exclaiming , “ Fitzwilliam account of the real , the worst objections to the match must be false ! Fitzwilliam account of the real , the worst objections to the match can not be ! Fitzwilliam account of the real , the worst objections to the match must be the grossest falsehood!”—and when Elizabeth had gone through the letter , though scarcely knowing anything of the last page or two , put the letter hastily away , protesting that Elizabeth would not regard the letter , that Elizabeth would never look in the letter again . 
 
  In this perturbed state of mind , with thoughts that could rest on nothing , Elizabeth walked on ; but it would not do ; in half a minute the letter was unfolded again , and collecting Elizabeth as well as Elizabeth could , Elizabeth again began the mortifying perusal of all that related to George , and commanded Elizabeth so far as to examine the meaning of every sentence . The account of Fitzwilliam connection with the Pemberley family was exactly what Fitzwilliam had related Fitzwilliam ; and the kindness of the late Fitzwilliam , though Elizabeth had not before known the kindness of the late Fitzwilliam extent , agreed equally well with Fitzwilliam own words . So far each recital confirmed the other ; but when Elizabeth came to the will , the difference was great . What George had said of the living was fresh in Elizabeth memory , and as Elizabeth recalled George very words , it was impossible not to feel that there was gross duplicity on one side or the other ; and , for a few moments , Elizabeth flattered Elizabeth that Elizabeth wishes did not err . But when Elizabeth read and re - read with the closest attention , the particulars immediately following of George ’s resigning all pretensions to the living , of George receiving in lieu so considerable a sum as three thousand pounds , again was Elizabeth forced to hesitate . Elizabeth put down the letter , weighed every circumstance with what Elizabeth meant to be impartiality — deliberated on the probability of each statement — but with little success . On both sides it was only assertion . Again Elizabeth read on ; but every line proved more clearly that the affair , which Elizabeth had believed it impossible that any contrivance could so represent as to render Fitzwilliam ’s conduct in the affair , which Elizabeth had believed it impossible that any contrivance could so represent as to render Fitzwilliam ’s conduct in less than infamous , was capable of a turn which must make Fitzwilliam entirely blameless throughout the whole . 
 
  The extravagance and general profligacy which Fitzwilliam scrupled not to lay at Charlie ’s charge , exceedingly shocked Elizabeth ; the more so , as Elizabeth could bring no proof of The extravagance and general profligacy which Fitzwilliam scrupled not to lay at Charlie ’s charge injustice . Elizabeth had never heard of Fitzwilliam before Fitzwilliam entrance into the — — shire Militia , in which Fitzwilliam had engaged at the persuasion of the young man who , on meeting Fitzwilliam accidentally in town , had there renewed a slight acquaintance . Of Fitzwilliam former way of life nothing had been known in Hertfordshire but what Fitzwilliam told Fitzwilliam . As to Fitzwilliam real character , had information been in Elizabeth power , Elizabeth had never felt a wish of enquiring . Fitzwilliam countenance , voice , and manner had established Fitzwilliam at once in the possession of every virtue . Elizabeth tried to recollect some instance of goodness , some distinguished trait of integrity or benevolence , that might rescue Fitzwilliam from the attacks of Fitzwilliam ; or at least , by the predominance of virtue , atone for those casual errors under which Elizabeth would endeavour to class what Fitzwilliam had described as the idleness and vice of many years ’ continuance . But no such recollection befriended Elizabeth . Elizabeth could see Fitzwilliam instantly before Elizabeth , in every charm of air and address ; but Elizabeth could remember no more substantial good than the general approbation of the neighbourhood , and the regard which Fitzwilliam social powers had gained Fitzwilliam in the mess . After pausing on this point a considerable while , Elizabeth once more continued to read . But , alas ! the story which followed , of Fitzwilliam designs on Georgiana , received some confirmation from what had passed between Fitzwilliam and Elizabeth only the morning before ; and at last Elizabeth was referred for the truth of every particular to Fitzwilam himself — from whom Elizabeth had previously received the information of Fitzwilliam near concern in all Fitzwilliam cousin ’s affairs , and whose character Elizabeth had no reason to question . At one time Elizabeth had almost resolved on applying to Fitzwilliam , but the idea was checked by the awkwardness of applying , and at length wholly banished by the conviction that Fitzwilliam would never have hazarded such a proposal , if Fitzwilliam had not been well assured of Fitzwilliam cousin ’s corroboration . 
 
  Elizabeth perfectly remembered everything that had passed in conversation between George and Elizabeth , in George and Elizabeth first evening at Mr. Phillips ’s . Many of George expressions were still fresh in Elizabeth memory . Elizabeth was now struck with the impropriety of such communications to a stranger , and wondered the impropriety of such communications to a stranger had escaped Elizabeth before . Elizabeth saw the indelicacy of putting Fitzwilliam forward as Fitzwilliam had done , and the inconsistency of Fitzwilliam professions with Fitzwilliam conduct . Elizabeth remembered that Fitzwilliam had boasted of having no fear of seeing Fitzwilliam — that Fitzwilliam might leave Hertfordshire , but that Fitzwilliam should stand Fitzwilliam ground ; yet Fitzwilliam had avoided the Netherfield ball the very next week . Elizabeth remembered also that , till the Pemberley family had quitted Hertfordshire , Fitzwilliam had told Fitzwilliam story to no one but Elizabeth ; but that after quitted Fitzwilliam story had been everywhere discussed ; that Fitzwilliam had then no reserves , no scruples in sinking Fitzwilliam ’s character , though Fitzwilliam had assured Elizabeth that respect for the father would always prevent Fitzwilliam exposing Fitzwilliam . 
 
  How differently did everything now appear in which Fitzwilliam was concerned ! Fitzwilliam attentions to Miss King were now the consequence of views solely and hatefully mercenary ; and the mediocrity of Elizabeth fortune proved no longer the moderation of Fitzwilliam wishes , but Fitzwilliam eagerness to grasp at anything . Fitzwilliam behaviour to Elizabeth could now have had no tolerable motive ; Fitzwilliam had either been deceived with regard to Elizabeth fortune , or had been gratifying Fitzwilliam vanity by encouraging the preference which Elizabeth believed Elizabeth had most incautiously shown . Every lingering struggle in Fitzwilliam favour grew fainter and fainter ; and in farther justification of Fitzwilliam , Elizabeth could not but allow that Fitzwilliam , when questioned by Jane , had long ago asserted Fitzwilliam blamelessness in the affair ; that proud and repulsive as were Fitzwilliam manners , Elizabeth had never , in the whole course of their acquaintance — an acquaintance which had latterly brought their much together , and given Elizabeth a sort of intimacy with Fitzwilliam ways — seen anything that betrayed Fitzwilliam to be unprincipled or unjust — anything that spoke Fitzwilliam of irreligious or immoral habits ; that among Fitzwilliam own connections Fitzwilliam was esteemed and valued — that even George had allowed Fitzwilliam merit as a brother , and that Elizabeth had often heard Fitzwilliam speak so affectionately of Fitzwilliam sister as to prove Fitzwilliam capable of some amiable feeling ; that had Fitzwilliam actions been what Charlie represented Fitzwilliam actions , so gross a violation of everything right could hardly have been concealed from the world ; and that friendship between a person capable of it , and such an amiable man as Fitzwilliam , was incomprehensible . 
 
  Elizabeth grew absolutely ashamed of Elizabeth . Of neither Fitzwilliam nor George could Elizabeth think without feeling Elizabeth had been blind , partial , prejudiced , absurd . 
 
  “ How despicably Elizabeth have acted ! ” Elizabeth cried ; “ I , who have prided Elizabeth on Elizabeth discernment ! I , who have valued Elizabeth on Elizabeth abilities ! who have often disdained the generous candour of Elizabeth sister , and gratified Elizabeth vanity in useless or blameable mistrust ! How humiliating is this discovery ! Yet , how just a humiliation ! Had Elizabeth been in love , Elizabeth could not have been more wretchedly blind ! But vanity , not love , has been Elizabeth folly . Pleased with the preference of one , and offended by the neglect of the other , on the very beginning of their acquaintance , Elizabeth have courted prepossession and ignorance , and driven reason away , where either were concerned . Till this moment Elizabeth never knew Elizabeth . ” 
 
  From Elizabeth to Jane — from Jane to Fitzwilliam , Elizabeth thoughts were in a line which soon brought to Elizabeth recollection that Fitzwilliam ’s explanation there had appeared very insufficient , and Elizabeth read Fitzwilliam account of the real , the worst objections to the match again . Widely different was the effect of a second perusal . How could Elizabeth deny that credit to Fitzwilliam assertions in one instance , which Elizabeth had been obliged to give in the other ? Fitzwilliam declared Fitzwilliam to be totally unsuspicious of Elizabeth sister ’s attachment ; and Elizabeth could not help remembering what Charlie opinion had always been . Neither could Elizabeth deny the justice of Fitzwilliam description of Jane . Elizabeth felt that Jane ’s feelings , though fervent , were little displayed , and that there was a constant complacency in Jane air and manner not often united with great sensibility . 
 
  When Elizabeth came to that part of the letter in which Elizabeth family were mentioned in terms of such mortifying , yet merited reproach , Elizabeth sense of shame was severe . The justice of the charge struck Elizabeth too forcibly for denial , and the circumstances to which Fitzwilliam particularly alluded as having passed at the Netherfield ball , and as confirming all Fitzwilliam first disapprobation , could not have made a stronger impression on Fitzwilliam mind than on Elizabeth . 
 
  The compliment to Elizabeth and Jane was not unfelt . The compliment to Elizabeth and Jane soothed , but The compliment to Elizabeth and Jane could not console Elizabeth for the contempt which had thus been self - attracted by the rest of Elizabeth family ; and as Elizabeth considered that Jane ’s disappointment had in fact been the work of Jane nearest relations , and reflected how materially the credit of Elizabeth and Jane must be hurt by such impropriety of conduct , Elizabeth felt depressed beyond anything Elizabeth had ever known before . 
 
  After wandering along the lane for two hours , giving way to every variety of thought — re - considering events , determining probabilities , and reconciling Elizabeth , as well as Elizabeth could , to a change so sudden and so important , fatigue , and a recollection of Elizabeth long absence , made Elizabeth at length return home ; and Elizabeth entered the house with the wish of appearing cheerful as usual , and the resolution of repressing such reflections as must make Elizabeth unfit for conversation . 
 
  Elizabeth was immediately told that the two gentlemen from Rosings had each called during Elizabeth absence ; Fitzwilliam , only for a few minutes , to take leave — but that Fitzwilliam had been sitting with them at least an hour , hoping for Elizabeth return , and almost resolving to walk after Elizabeth till Elizabeth could be found . Elizabeth could but just affect concern in missing Fitzwilliam ; Elizabeth really rejoiced at it . Fitzwilliam was no longer an object ; Elizabeth could think only of Elizabeth letter . 
 Chapter 
 
  The two gentlemen left Rosings the next morning , and William Collins having been in waiting near the lodges , to make The two gentlemen William Collins parting obeisance , was able to bring home the pleasing intelligence , of The two gentlemen appearing in very good health , and in as tolerable spirits as could be expected , after the melancholy scene so lately gone through at Rosings . To Rosings William Collins then hastened , to console Cathleen and Cathleen daughter ; and on William Collins return brought back , with great satisfaction , a message from her ladyship , importing that her ladyship felt her ladyship so dull as to make her ladyship very desirous of having them all to dine with her ladyship . 
 
  Cathleen daughter could not see Cathleen without recollecting that , had Cathleen daughter chosen it , Cathleen daughter might by this time have been presented to Cathleen as Cathleen future niece ; nor could Cathleen daughter think , without a smile , of what her ladyship ’s indignation would have been . “ What would her ladyship have said ? how would her ladyship have behaved ? ” were questions with which Cathleen amused Cathleen . 
 
  Their first subject was the diminution of the Rosings party . “ Cathleen assure you , Cathleen feel the diminution of the Rosings party exceedingly , ” said Cathleen ; “ Cathleen believe no one feels the loss of friends so much as Cathleen do . But Cathleen am particularly attached to these young men , and know these young men to be so much attached to Cathleen ! these young men were excessively sorry to go ! But so these young men always are . The dear Colonel rallied The dear Colonel spirits tolerably till just at last ; but Fitzwilliam seemed to feel the diminution of the Rosings party most acutely , more , Cathleen think , than last year . Fitzwilliam attachment to Rosings certainly increases . ” 
 
  William Collins had a compliment , and an allusion to throw in here , which were kindly smiled on by Cathleen and Cathleen daughter . 
 
  Cathleen observed , after dinner , that Miss Bennet seemed out of spirits , and immediately accounting for seemed Cathleen , by supposing that Miss Bennet did not like to go home again so soon , Cathleen added : 
 
  “ But if that is the case , Cathleen daughter must write to Cathleen daughter mother and beg that Cathleen daughter may stay a little longer . William Collins will be very glad of Cathleen daughter company , Cathleen am sure . ” 
 
  “ Cathleen daughter am much obliged to her ladyship for her ladyship kind invitation , ” replied Cathleen daughter , “ but it is not in Cathleen daughter power to accept her ladyship kind invitation . Cathleen daughter must be in town next Saturday . ” 
 
  “ Why , at that rate , them all will have been here only six weeks . her ladyship expected them all to stay two months . her ladyship told William Collins so before them all came . There can be no occasion for them all going so soon . Cathleen daughter mother could certainly spare them all for another fortnight . ” 
 
  “ But Cathleen daughter father can not . Cathleen daughter father wrote last week to hurry Cathleen daughter return . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! Cathleen daughter father of course may spare Cathleen daughter , if Cathleen daughter mother can . Daughters are never of so much consequence to a father . And if them all will stay another month complete , it will be in her ladyship power to take one of them all as far as London , for her ladyship am going there early in June , for a week ; and as Dawson does not object to the barouche - box , there will be very good room for one of them all — and indeed , if the weather should happen to be cool , her ladyship should not object to taking them all , as them all are neither of you large . ” 
 
  “ her ladyship are all kindness , her ladyship ; but Cathleen daughter believe we must abide by we original plan . ” 
 
  Cathleen seemed resigned . “ William Collins , William Collins must send a servant with these young men . Cathleen daughter know Cathleen always speak Cathleen mind , and Cathleen can not bear the idea of these young men travelling post by these young men . travelling is highly improper . William Collins must contrive to send somebody . Cathleen have the greatest dislike in the world to that sort of thing . Young women should always be properly guarded and attended , according to Young women situation in life . When Cathleen niece Georgiana went to Ramsgate last summer , Cathleen made a point of Cathleen niece Georgiana having two men - servants go with Cathleen niece Georgiana . Cathleen niece Georgiana , could not have appeared with propriety in a different manner . Cathleen am excessively attentive to all those things . William Collins must send John with these young men , William Collins . Cathleen am glad it occurred to Cathleen to mention send ; for it would really be discreditable to William Collins to let these young men go alone . ” 
 
  “ Cathleen daughter uncle is to send a servant for us . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! Cathleen daughter uncle ! Cathleen daughter uncle keeps a man - servant , does Cathleen daughter uncle ? her ladyship am very glad them all have somebody who thinks of these things . Where shall them all change horses ? Oh ! Bromley , of course . If them all mention Cathleen name at the Bell , them all will be attended to . ” 
 
  Cathleen had many other questions to ask respecting us journey , and as Cathleen did not answer many other questions to ask respecting us journey Cathleen , attention was necessary , which Cathleen daughter believed to be lucky for Cathleen daughter ; or , with a mind so occupied , Cathleen daughter might have forgotten where Cathleen daughter was . Reflection must be reserved for solitary hours ; whenever Cathleen daughter was alone , Cathleen daughter gave way to Reflection as the greatest relief ; and not a day went by without a solitary walk , in which Cathleen daughter might indulge in all the delight of unpleasant recollections . 
 
  Fitzwilliam ’s letter Cathleen daughter was in a fair way of soon knowing by heart . Cathleen daughter studied every sentence ; and Cathleen daughter feelings towards Fitzwilliam ’s letter writer were at times widely different . When Cathleen daughter remembered the style of Fitzwilliam address , Cathleen daughter was still full of indignation ; but when Cathleen daughter considered how unjustly Cathleen daughter had condemned and upbraided Fitzwilliam , Cathleen daughter anger was turned against Cathleen daughter ; and Fitzwilliam disappointed feelings became the object of compassion . Fitzwilliam attachment excited gratitude , Fitzwilliam general character respect ; but Cathleen daughter could not approve Fitzwilliam ; nor could Cathleen daughter for a moment repent Cathleen daughter refusal , or feel the slightest inclination ever to see Fitzwilliam again . In Cathleen daughter own past behaviour , there was a constant source of vexation and regret ; and in the unhappy defects of Cathleen daughter family , a subject of yet heavier chagrin . the unhappy defects of Cathleen daughter family were hopeless of remedy . Cathleen daughter father , contented with laughing at the unhappy defects of Cathleen daughter family , would never exert Cathleen daughter father to restrain the wild giddiness of Cathleen daughter father youngest daughters ; and Cathleen daughter mother , with manners so far from right Cathleen daughter mother , was entirely insensible of the evil . Cathleen daughter had frequently united with Jane in an endeavour to check the imprudence of Catherine and Lydia ; but while Catherine and Lydia were supported by Cathleen daughter mother indulgence , what chance could there be of improvement ? Catherine , weak - spirited , irritable , and completely under Lydia ’s guidance , had been always affronted by their advice ; and Lydia , self - willed and careless , would scarcely give Catherine and Lydia a hearing . Catherine and Lydia were ignorant , idle , and vain . While there was an officer in Meryton , Catherine and Lydia would flirt with an officer in Meryton ; and while Meryton was within a walk of Longbourn , Catherine and Lydia would be going there forever . 
 
  Anxiety on Jane ’s behalf was another prevailing concern ; and Fitzwilliam ’s explanation , by restoring Charles to all Charles former good opinion , heightened the sense of what Jane had lost . Fitzwilliam affection was proved to have been sincere , and Fitzwilliam conduct cleared of all blame , unless any could attach to the implicitness of Fitzwilliam confidence in Jane . How grievous then was the thought that , of a situation so desirable in every respect , so replete with advantage , so promising for happiness , Jane had been deprived , by the folly and indecorum of Jane own family ! 
 
  When to these recollections was added the development of George ’s character , it may be easily believed that the happy spirits which had seldom been depressed before , were now so much affected as to make it almost impossible for George ’s to appear tolerably cheerful . 
 
  them all engagements at Rosings were as frequent during the last week of her ladyship stay as them all engagements at Rosings had been at first . The very last evening was spent there ; and her ladyship again enquired minutely into the particulars of them all journey , gave them all directions as to the best method of packing , and was so urgent on the necessity of placing gowns in the only right way , that Cathleen daughter thought Cathleen daughter obliged , on Cathleen daughter return , to undo all the work of the morning , and pack Cathleen daughter trunk afresh . 
 
  When them all parted , Cathleen , with great condescension , wished them all a good journey , and invited them all to come to Hunsford again next year ; and Cathleen exerted Cathleen so far as to curtsey and hold out Cathleen hand to them all . 
 Chapter 
 
  On Saturday morning Elizabeth and William Collins met for breakfast a few minutes before the others appeared ; and William Collins took the opportunity of paying the parting civilities which William Collins deemed indispensably necessary . 
 
  “ William Collins know not , Miss Elizabeth , ” said William Collins , “ whether William Collins has yet expressed William Collins sense of Elizabeth kindness in coming to William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins ; but William Collins am very certain Elizabeth will not leave the house without receiving William Collins thanks for it . The favour of Elizabeth company has been much felt , William Collins assure Elizabeth . William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins know how little there is to tempt anyone to the house . William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins plain manner of living , William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins small rooms and few domestics , and the little William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins see of the world , must make Hunsford extremely dull to a young lady like Elizabeth ; but William Collins hope Elizabeth will believe William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins grateful for the condescension , and that William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins have done everything in William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins power to prevent Elizabeth spending Elizabeth time unpleasantly . ” 
 
  Elizabeth was eager with Elizabeth thanks and assurances of happiness . Elizabeth had spent six weeks with great enjoyment ; and the pleasure of being with Charlotte , and the kind attentions Elizabeth had received , must make Elizabeth feel the obliged . William Collins was gratified , and with a more smiling solemnity replied : 
 
  “ It gives William Collins great pleasure to hear that Elizabeth have passed Elizabeth time not disagreeably . William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins have certainly done William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins best ; and most fortunately having it in William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins power to introduce Elizabeth to very superior society , and , from William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins connection with Rosings , the frequent means of varying the humble home scene , William Collins think William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins may flatter William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins that your Hunsford visit can not have been entirely irksome . William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins situation with regard to Cathleen ’s family is indeed the sort of extraordinary advantage and blessing which few can boast . You see on what a footing William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins are . You see how continually William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins are engaged there . In truth William Collins must acknowledge that , with all the disadvantages of the house , William Collins should not think anyone abiding in the house an object of compassion , while anyone abiding in the house are sharers of William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins intimacy at Rosings . ” 
 
  Words were insufficient for the elevation of William Collins feelings ; and William Collins was obliged to walk about the room , while Elizabeth tried to unite civility and truth in a few short sentences . 
 
  “ William Collins may , in fact , carry a very favourable report of us into Hertfordshire , William Collins . Elizabeth flatter Elizabeth at least that Elizabeth will be able to do so . Cathleen ’s great attentions to William Collins Elizabeth have been a daily witness of ; and altogether Elizabeth trust it does not appear that Elizabeth friend has drawn an unfortunate — but on this point it will be as well to be silent . Only let William Collins assure Elizabeth , William Collins dear Miss Elizabeth , that William Collins can from William Collins heart most cordially wish Elizabeth equal felicity in marriage . William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins have but one mind and one way of thinking . There is in everything a most remarkable resemblance of character and ideas between William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins . William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins seem to have been designed for each other . ” 
 
  Elizabeth could safely say that it was a great happiness where seem was the case , and with equal sincerity could add , that Elizabeth firmly believed and rejoiced in Charlotte domestic comforts . Elizabeth was not sorry , however , to have the recital of Charlotte domestic comforts interrupted by William Collins . Poor Charlotte ! it was melancholy to leave Charlotte to such society ! But Charlotte had chosen it with Charlotte eyes open ; and though evidently regretting that Charlotte visitors were to go , Charlotte did not seem to ask for compassion . Charlotte home and Charlotte housekeeping , Charlotte parish and Charlotte poultry , and all Charlotte home and Charlotte housekeeping , Charlotte parish and Charlotte poultry , and all dependent concerns , had not yet lost Charlotte home and Charlotte housekeeping , Charlotte parish and Charlotte poultry , and all charms . 
 
  At length the chaise arrived , the trunks were fastened on , the parcels placed within , and it was pronounced to be ready . After an affectionate parting between the friends , Elizabeth was attended to the carriage by William Collins , and as they walked down the garden William Collins was commissioning Elizabeth with William Collins best respects to all Elizabeth family , not forgetting William Collins thanks for the kindness William Collins had received at Longbourn in the winter , and William Collins compliments to Edward and Madeline , though unknown . William Collins then handed Elizabeth in , Maria followed , and the door was on the point of being closed , when William Collins suddenly reminded they , with some consternation , that they had hitherto forgotten to leave any message for the ladies at Rosings . 
 
  “ But , ” William Collins added , “ Elizabeth will of course wish to have Elizabeth humble respects delivered to the ladies at Rosings , with Elizabeth grateful thanks for the ladies at Rosings kindness to Elizabeth while Elizabeth have been here . ” 
 
  Elizabeth made no objection ; the door was then allowed to be shut , and the carriage drove off . 
 
  “ Good gracious ! ” cried Maria , after a few minutes ’ silence , “ it seems but a day or two since they first came ! and yet how many things have happened ! ” 
 
  “ A great many indeed , ” said Elizabeth companion with a sigh . 
 
  “ they have dined nine times at Rosings , besides drinking tea there twice ! How much Elizabeth shall have to tell ! ” 
 
  Elizabeth added privately , “ And how much Elizabeth shall have to conceal ! ” 
 
  they journey was performed without much conversation , or any alarm ; and within four hours of they leaving Hunsford they reached Edward ’s house , where they were to remain a few days . 
 
  Jane looked well , and Elizabeth had little opportunity of studying Jane spirits , amidst the various engagements which the kindness of Elizabeth aunt had reserved for they . But Jane was to go home with Elizabeth , and at Longbourn there would be leisure enough for observation . 
 
  It was not without an effort , meanwhile , that Elizabeth could wait even for Longbourn , before Elizabeth told Elizabeth sister of Fitzwilliam ’s proposals . To know that Elizabeth had the power of revealing what would so exceedingly astonish Jane , and must , at the same time , so highly gratify whatever of Elizabeth own vanity Elizabeth had not yet been able to reason away , was such a temptation to openness as nothing could have conquered but the state of indecision in which Elizabeth remained as to the extent of what Elizabeth should communicate ; and Elizabeth fear , if Elizabeth once entered on the subject , of being hurried into repeating something of Charlotte which might only grieve Jane further . 
 Chapter 
 
  It was the second week in May , in which the three young ladies set out together from Gracechurch Street for the town of — — , in Hertfordshire ; and , as the three young ladies drew near the appointed inn where Father ’s carriage was to meet the three young ladies , the three young ladies quickly perceived , in token of the coachman ’s punctuality , both Kitty and Lydia looking out of a dining - room up stairs . both Kitty and Lydia had been above an hour in the appointed inn where Father ’s carriage was to meet the three young ladies , happily employed in visiting an opposite milliner , watching the sentinel on guard , and dressing a salad and cucumber . 
 
  After welcoming both Kitty and Lydia sisters , both Kitty and Lydia triumphantly displayed a table set out with such cold meat as an inn larder usually affords , exclaiming , “ Is not this nice ? Is not this an agreeable surprise ? ” 
 
  “ And both Kitty and Lydia mean to treat the three young ladies , ” added Lydia , “ but the three young ladies must lend both Kitty and Lydia the money , for both Kitty and Lydia have just spent both Kitty and Lydia at the shop out there . ” Then , showing Lydia purchases—“Look here , Lydia have bought this bonnet . Lydia do not think this bonnet is very pretty ; but Lydia thought Lydia might as well buy this bonnet as not . Lydia shall pull this bonnet to pieces as soon as Lydia get home , and see if Lydia can make this bonnet up any better . ” 
 
  And when Lydia sisters abused this bonnet as ugly , Lydia added , with perfect unconcern , “ Oh ! but there were two or three much uglier in the shop ; and when Lydia have bought some prettier - coloured satin to trim this bonnet with fresh , Lydia think it will be very tolerable . Besides , this bonnet will not much signify what one wears this summer , after the — — shire have left Meryton , and the — — shire are going in a fortnight . ” 
 
  “ Are the — — shire indeed ! ” cried Elizabeth , with the greatest satisfaction . 
 
  “ the — — shire are going to be encamped near Brighton ; and Elizabeth do so want Father ’s to take us all there for the summer ! take would be such a delicious scheme ; and Elizabeth dare say would hardly cost anything at all . Mamma would like to go too of all things ! Only think what a miserable summer else we shall have ! ” 
 
  “ Yes , ” thought Elizabeth , “ take would be a delightful scheme indeed , and completely do for us all at once . Good Heaven ! Brighton , and a whole campful of soldiers , to us , who have been overset already by one poor regiment of militia , and the monthly balls of Meryton ! ” 
 
  “ Now Lydia have got some news for the three young ladies , ” said Lydia , as the three young ladies sat down at table . “ What do the three young ladies think ? some news is excellent news — capital news — and about a certain person we all like ! ” 
 
  the three young ladies looked at each other , and the waiter was told the waiter need not stay . Lydia laughed , and said : 
 
  “ Aye , that is just like the three young ladies formality and discretion . Lydia thought the waiter must not hear , as if the waiter cared ! Lydia dare say the waiter often hears worse things said than Lydia am going to say . But the waiter is an ugly fellow ! Lydia am glad the waiter is gone . Lydia never saw such a long chin in Lydia life . Well , but now for Lydia news ; Lydia news is about a certain person we all like ; too good for the waiter , is Lydia news not ? There is no danger of a certain person we all like marrying Mary King . There ’s for the three young ladies ! Mary King is gone down to Mary King uncle at Liverpool : gone to stay . a certain person we all like is safe . ” 
 
  “ And Mary King is safe ! ” added Elizabeth ; “ safe from a connection imprudent as to fortune . ” 
 
  “ Mary King is a great fool for going away , if Mary King liked a certain person we all like . ” 
 
  “ But Jane hope there is no strong attachment on either side , ” said Jane . 
 
  “ Lydia am sure there is not on a certain person we all like . Lydia will answer for it , a certain person we all like never cared three straws about Mary King — who could about Mary King ? ” Elizabeth Elizabeth was shocked to think that , however incapable of such coarseness of expression Elizabeth , the coarseness of the sentiment was little other than Elizabeth own breast had harboured and fancied liberal ! 
 
  As soon as the three young ladies had ate , and the elder ones paid , Father ’s carriage was ordered ; and after some contrivance , the three young ladies , with all the three young ladies boxes , work - bags , and parcels , and the unwelcome addition of Kitty ’s and Lydia ’s purchases , were seated in Father ’s carriage . 
 
  “ How nicely the three young ladies are all crammed in , ” cried Lydia . “ Lydia am glad Lydia bought Lydia bonnet , if bought is only for the fun of having another bandbox ! Well , now let the three young ladies be quite comfortable and snug , and talk and laugh all the way home . And in the first place , let the three young ladies hear what has happened to the three young ladies since the three young ladies went away . Have the three young ladies seen any pleasant men ? Have the three young ladies had any flirting ? Lydia was in great hopes that one of the three young ladies would have got a husband before the three young ladies came back . Jane will be quite an old maid soon , Lydia declare . Jane is almost three - and - twenty ! Lord , how ashamed Elizabeth should be of not being married before three - and - twenty ! Elizabeth aunt Phillips wants the three young ladies so to get husbands , the three young ladies ca n’t think . Elizabeth aunt Phillips says Elizabeth had better have taken William Collins ; but Elizabeth do not think there would have been any fun in taken . Lord ! how Elizabeth should like to be married before any of the three young ladies ; and then Elizabeth would chaperon the three young ladies about to all the balls . Dear Elizabeth ! Kitty and Elizabeth had such a good piece of fun the other day at Colonel Forster ’s . Kitty and Elizabeth were to spend the day there , and Colonel Forster ’s promised to have a little dance in the evening ; ( by the bye , Mrs. Forster and Elizabeth are such friends ! ) and so Colonel Forster ’s asked the two Harringtons to come , but Harriet was ill , and so Pen was forced to come by Pen ; and then , what do the three young ladies think Kitty and Elizabeth did ? Kitty and Elizabeth dressed up Chamberlayne in woman ’s clothes on purpose to pass for a lady , only think what fun ! Not a soul knew of dressed , but Colonel Forster ’s and Colonel Forster ’s , and Kitty and Elizabeth , except Elizabeth aunt , for Kitty and Elizabeth were forced to borrow one of Elizabeth aunt gowns ; and you can not imagine how well Chamberlayne looked ! When Denny , and a certain person we all like , and Pratt , and two or three more of the men came in , Denny , and a certain person we all like , and Pratt , and two or three more of the men did not know Chamberlayne in the least . Lord ! how Elizabeth laughed ! and so did Elizabeth aunt . Elizabeth thought Elizabeth should have died . And that made the men suspect something , and then the men soon found out what was the matter . ” 
 
  With such kinds of histories of their parties and good jokes , did Lydia , assisted by Kitty ’s hints and additions , endeavour to amuse Lydia companions all the way to Longbourn . Elizabeth listened as little as Elizabeth could , but there was no escaping the frequent mention of a certain person we all like name . 
 
  the three young ladies reception at home was most kind . Mother rejoiced to see Jane in undiminished beauty ; and more than once during dinner did Father ’s say voluntarily to Elizabeth : 
 
  “ Mother am glad Elizabeth are come back , Elizabeth . ” 
 
  the three young ladies party in the dining - room was large , for almost all the Lucases came to meet Maria and hear the news ; and various were the subjects that occupied the three young ladies : Lady Lucas was enquiring of Maria , after the welfare and poultry of Lady Lucas eldest daughter ; Mother was doubly engaged , on one hand collecting an account of the present fashions from Jane , who sat some way below Mother , and , on the other , retailing them all to the younger Lucases ; and Lydia , in a voice rather louder than any other person ’s , was enumerating the various pleasures of the morning to anybody who would hear Lydia . 
 
  “ Oh ! Mary , ” said Lydia , “ Lydia wish Mary had gone with Kitty and Elizabeth , for Kitty and Elizabeth had such fun ! As Kitty and Elizabeth went along , Kitty and Elizabeth drew up the blinds , and pretended there was nobody in Father ’s carriage ; and Lydia should have gone so all the way , if Kitty had not been sick ; and when Kitty and Elizabeth got to a certain person we all like , Lydia do think Kitty and Elizabeth behaved very handsomely , for Kitty and Elizabeth treated the other three with the nicest cold luncheon in the world , and if Mary would have gone , Kitty and Elizabeth would have treated Mary too . And then when Kitty and Elizabeth came away it was such fun ! Lydia thought Kitty and Elizabeth never should have got into Father ’s carriage . Lydia was ready to die of laughter . And then Kitty and Elizabeth were so merry all the way home ! Kitty and Elizabeth talked and laughed so loud , that anybody might have heard Kitty and Elizabeth ten miles off ! ” 
 
  To this Mary very gravely replied , “ Far be it from Mary , Lydia , to depreciate such pleasures ! such pleasures would doubtless be congenial with the generality of female minds . But Mary confess such pleasures would have no charms for Mary — Mary should infinitely prefer a book . ” 
 
  But of this answer Lydia heard not a word . Lydia seldom listened to anybody for more than half a minute , and never attended to Mary at all . 
 
  In the afternoon Lydia was urgent with the rest of the three young ladies to walk to Meryton , and to see how everybody went on ; but Elizabeth steadily opposed the scheme . It should not be said that the Miss Bennets could not be at home half a day before the Miss Bennets were in pursuit of the officers . There was another reason too for Elizabeth opposition . Elizabeth dreaded seeing Charlie again , and was resolved to avoid seeing as long as possible . The comfort to Elizabeth of the officers approaching removal was indeed beyond expression . In a fortnight the three young ladies were to go — and once gone , Elizabeth hoped there could be nothing more to plague Elizabeth on Charlie account . 
 
  Elizabeth had not been many hours at home before Elizabeth found that the Brighton scheme , of which Lydia had given them a hint at the appointed inn where Father ’s carriage was to meet the three young ladies , was under frequent discussion between Elizabeth parents . Elizabeth saw directly that Father ’s had not the smallest intention of yielding ; but Father ’s answers were at the same time so vague and equivocal , that Elizabeth mother , though often disheartened , had never yet despaired of succeeding at last . 
 Chapter 
 
  Elizabeth ’s impatience to acquaint Jane with what had happened could no longer be overcome ; and at length , resolving to suppress every particular in which Elizabeth ’s sister was concerned , and preparing Jane to be surprised , Elizabeth ’s related to Jane the next morning the chief of the scene between Fitzwilliam and Elizabeth ’s . 
 
  Jane astonishment was soon lessened by the strong sisterly partiality which made any admiration of Elizabeth ’s appear perfectly natural ; and all surprise was shortly lost in other feelings . Jane was sorry that Fitzwilliam should have delivered Fitzwilliam sentiments in a manner so little suited to recommend Fitzwilliam sentiments ; but still more was Jane grieved for the unhappiness which Jane sister ’s refusal must have given Fitzwilliam . 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam being so sure of succeeding was wrong , ” said Jane , “ and certainly ought not to have appeared ; but consider how much Fitzwilliam being so sure of succeeding must increase Fitzwilliam disappointment ! ” 
 
  “ Indeed , ” replied Elizabeth ’s , “ Elizabeth ’s am heartily sorry for Fitzwilliam ; but Fitzwilliam has other feelings , which will probably soon drive away Fitzwilliam regard for Elizabeth ’s . Jane do not blame Elizabeth ’s , however , for refusing Fitzwilliam ? ” 
 
  “ Blame Elizabeth ’s ! Oh , no . ” 
 
  “ But Elizabeth ’s blame Elizabeth ’s for having spoken so warmly of George ? ” 
 
  “ No — Elizabeth ’s do not know that Elizabeth ’s were wrong in saying what Elizabeth ’s did . ” 
 
  “ But Jane will know it , when Elizabeth ’s tell Jane what happened the very next day . ” 
 
  Elizabeth ’s then spoke of the letter , repeating the whole of the letter contents as far as the letter contents concerned George . What a stroke was this for poor Jane ! who would willingly have gone through the world without believing that so much wickedness existed in the whole race of mankind , as was here collected in George . Nor was Fitzwilliam ’s vindication , though grateful to Jane feelings , capable of consoling Jane for such discovery . Most earnestly did Jane labour to prove the probability of error , and seek to clear the one without involving the other . 
 
  “ This will not do , ” said Elizabeth ’s ; “ Jane never will be able to make both of them good for anything . Take Jane choice , but Jane must be satisfied with only one . There is but such a quantity of merit between both of them ; just enough to make one good sort of man ; and of late it has been shifting about pretty much . For Elizabeth ’s part , Elizabeth ’s am inclined to believe it all Fitzwilliam ’s ; but Jane shall do as Jane choose . ” 
 
  It was some time , however , before a smile could be extorted from Jane . 
 
  “ Jane do not know when Jane have been more shocked , ” said Jane . “ George so very bad ! It is almost past belief . And poor Fitzwilliam ! Elizabeth ’s , only consider what Fitzwilliam must have suffered . Such a disappointment ! and with the knowledge of Elizabeth ’s ill opinion , too ! and having to relate such a thing of Jane ! It is really too distressing . Elizabeth ’s am sure Elizabeth ’s must feel it so . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! no , Elizabeth ’s regret and compassion are all done away by seeing Elizabeth ’s so full of both . Elizabeth ’s know Elizabeth ’s will do Fitzwilliam such ample justice , that Elizabeth ’s am growing every moment more unconcerned and indifferent . Elizabeth ’s profusion makes Elizabeth ’s saving ; and if Elizabeth ’s lament over Fitzwilliam much longer , Elizabeth ’s heart will be as light as a feather . ” 
 
  “ Poor George ! there is such an expression of goodness in George countenance ! such an openness and gentleness in George manner ! ” 
 
  “ There certainly was some great mismanagement in the education of those two young men . One has got all the goodness , and the other all the appearance of all the goodness . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth ’s never thought Fitzwilliam so deficient in the appearance of it as Elizabeth ’s used to do . ” 
 
  “ And yet Elizabeth ’s meant to be uncommonly clever in taking so decided a dislike to Fitzwilliam , without any reason . It is such a spur to one ’s genius , such an opening for wit , to have a dislike of that kind . One may be continually abusive without saying anything just ; but one can not always be laughing at a man without now and then stumbling on something witty . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth ’s , when Elizabeth ’s first read the letter , Elizabeth ’s am sure Elizabeth ’s could not treat the matter as Elizabeth ’s do now . ” 
 
  “ Indeed , Elizabeth ’s could not . Elizabeth ’s was uncomfortable enough , Elizabeth ’s may say unhappy . And with no one to speak to about what Elizabeth ’s felt , no Jane to comfort Elizabeth ’s and say that Elizabeth ’s had not been so very weak and vain and nonsensical as Elizabeth ’s knew Elizabeth ’s had ! Oh ! how Elizabeth ’s wanted Elizabeth ’s ! ” 
 
  “ How unfortunate that Elizabeth ’s should have used such very strong expressions in speaking of George to Fitzwilliam , for now such very strong expressions do appear wholly undeserved . ” 
 
  “ Certainly . But the misfortune of speaking with bitterness is a most natural consequence of the prejudices Elizabeth ’s had been encouraging . There is one point on which Elizabeth ’s want Jane advice . Elizabeth ’s want to be told whether Elizabeth ’s ought , or ought not , to make our acquaintances in general understand George ’s character . ” Jane Jane paused a little , and then replied , “ Surely there can be no occasion for exposing George so dreadfully . What is Jane opinion ? ” 
 
  “ That exposing ought not to be attempted . Fitzwilliam has not authorised Jane to make Fitzwilliam communication public . On the contrary , every particular relative to Fitzwilliam sister was meant to be kept as much as possible to Jane ; and if Jane endeavour to undeceive people as to the rest of Fitzwilliam conduct , who will believe Jane ? The general prejudice against Fitzwilliam is so violent , that it would be the death of half the good people in Meryton to attempt to place Fitzwilliam in an amiable light . Jane am not equal to it . George will soon be gone ; and therefore it will not signify to anyone here what George really is . Some time hence it will be all found out , and then we may laugh at their stupidity in not knowing it before . At present Jane will say nothing about it . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth ’s are quite right . To have George errors made public might ruin George for ever . George is now , perhaps , sorry for what George has done , and anxious to re - establish a character . We must not make George desperate . ” 
 
  The tumult of Elizabeth ’s mind was allayed by this conversation . Elizabeth ’s had got rid of two of the secrets which had weighed on Elizabeth ’s for a fortnight , and was certain of a willing listener in Jane , whenever Elizabeth ’s might wish to talk again of either . But there was still something lurking behind , of which prudence forbade the disclosure . Elizabeth ’s dared not relate the other half of the letter , nor explain to Jane how sincerely Elizabeth ’s had been valued by Elizabeth ’s friend . Here was knowledge in which no one could partake ; and Elizabeth ’s was sensible that nothing less than a perfect understanding between the parties could justify Elizabeth ’s in throwing off this last encumbrance of mystery . “ And then , ” said Elizabeth ’s , “ if that very improbable event should ever take place , Elizabeth ’s shall merely be able to tell what Charles may tell in a much more agreeable manner Charles . The liberty of communication can not be Elizabeth ’s till The liberty of communication has lost all The liberty of communication value ! ” 
 
  Elizabeth ’s was now , on being settled at home , at leisure to observe the real state of Elizabeth ’s sister ’s spirits . Jane was not happy . Jane still cherished a very tender affection for Charles . Having never even fancied Jane in love before , Jane regard had all the warmth of first attachment , and , from Jane age and disposition , greater steadiness than most first attachments often boast ; and so fervently did Jane value Charles remembrance , and prefer Charles to every other man , that all Jane good sense , and all Jane attention to the feelings of Jane friends , were requisite to check the indulgence of those regrets which must have been injurious to Jane own health and Jane friends tranquillity . 
 
  “ Well , Elizabeth ’s , ” said prudence one day , “ what is Elizabeth ’s opinion now of this sad business of Jane ’s ? For prudence part , prudence am determined never to speak of this sad business of Jane ’s again to anybody . prudence told prudence sister Phillips so the other day . But prudence can not find out that Jane saw anything of Charles in London . Well , Charles is a very undeserving young man — and prudence do not suppose there ’s the least chance in the world of Jane ever getting Charles now . There is no talk of Charles coming to Netherfield again in the summer ; and prudence have enquired of everybody , too , who is likely to know . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth ’s do not believe Charles will ever live at Netherfield any more . ” 
 
  “ Oh well ! it is just as Charles chooses . Nobody wants Charles to come . Though prudence shall always say Charles used prudence daughter extremely ill ; and if prudence was Jane , prudence would not have put up with used . Well , Elizabeth ’s comfort is , Elizabeth ’s am sure Jane will die of a broken heart ; and then Charles will be sorry for what Charles has done . ” 
 
  But as Elizabeth ’s could not receive comfort from any such expectation , Elizabeth ’s made no answer . 
 
  “ Well , Elizabeth ’s , ” continued Elizabeth ’s mother , soon afterwards , “ and so the Collinses live very comfortable , do the Collinses ? Well , well , Elizabeth ’s only hope it will last . And what sort of table do the Collinses keep ? Charlotte is an excellent manager , Elizabeth ’s dare say . If Charlotte is half as sharp as Charlotte mother , Charlotte is saving enough . There is nothing extravagant in the Collinses housekeeping , Elizabeth ’s dare say . ” 
 
  “ No , nothing at all . ” 
 
  “ A great deal of good management , depend upon nothing extravagant in the Collinses housekeeping . Yes , yes . the Collinses will take care not to outrun the Collinses income . the Collinses will never be distressed for money . Well , much good may it do the Collinses ! And so , Elizabeth ’s suppose , the Collinses often talk of having Longbourn when Elizabeth ’s father is dead . the Collinses look upon Longbourn as quite the Collinses own , Elizabeth ’s dare say , whenever that happens . ” 
 
  “ It was a subject which the Collinses could not mention before Elizabeth ’s . ” 
 
  “ No ; it would have been strange if the Collinses had ; but Elizabeth ’s make no doubt the Collinses often talk of it between the Collinses . Well , if the Collinses can be easy with an estate that is not lawfully the Collinses own , so much the better . Elizabeth ’s should be ashamed of having one that was only entailed on Elizabeth ’s . ” 
 Chapter 
 
  The first week of the regiment ’s return was soon gone . The second began . The second was the last of the regiment ’s stay in Meryton , and all the young ladies in the neighbourhood were drooping apace . The dejection was almost universal . The elder Miss Bennets alone were still able to eat , drink , and sleep , and pursue the usual course of The elder Miss Bennets alone employments . Very frequently were The elder Miss Bennets alone reproached for this insensibility by Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family . 
 
  “ Good Heaven ! what is to become of Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family ? What are Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family to do ? ” would Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family often exclaim in the bitterness of woe . “ How can Elizabeth be smiling so , Elizabeth ? ” 
 
  Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother shared all Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family grief ; Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother remembered what Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother had Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother endured on a similar occasion , five - and - twenty years ago . 
 
  “ Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother am sure , ” said Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother , “ Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother cried for two days together when Colonel Miller ’s regiment went away . Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother thought Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother should have broken Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother heart . ” 
 
  “ Lydia am sure Lydia shall break Lydia , ” said Lydia . 
 
  “ If one could but go to Brighton ! ” observed Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother . 
 
  “ Oh , yes!—if one could but go to Brighton ! But papa is so disagreeable . ” 
 
  “ A little sea - bathing would set me up forever . ” 
 
  “ And me aunt Phillips is sure A little sea - bathing would do me a great deal of good , ” added Kitty . 
 
  Such were the kind of lamentations resounding perpetually through Longbourn House . Elizabeth tried to be diverted by the kind of lamentations resounding perpetually through Longbourn House ; but all sense of pleasure was lost in shame . Elizabeth felt anew the justice of Fitzwilliam ’s objections ; and never had Elizabeth been so much disposed to pardon Fitzwilliam ’s interference in the views of Fitzwilliam ’s friend . 
 
  But the gloom of Lydia ’s prospect was shortly cleared away ; for Lydia received an invitation from Mrs. Forster , the wife of the colonel of the regiment ’s , to accompany Lydia to Brighton . Lydia was a very young woman , and very lately married . A resemblance in good humour and good spirits had recommended Lydia and Lydia to each other , and out of Lydia and Lydia three months ’ acquaintance Lydia and Lydia had been intimate two . 
 
  The rapture of Lydia on this occasion , Lydia adoration of Lydia , the delight of Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother , and the mortification of Kitty , are scarcely to be described . Wholly inattentive to Lydia sister ’s feelings , Lydia flew about Longbourn House in restless ecstasy , calling for everyone ’s congratulations , and laughing and talking with more violence than ever ; whilst the luckless Kitty continued in the parlour repining at Kitty fate in terms as unreasonable as Kitty accent was peevish . 
 
  “ Lydia can not see why Lydia should not ask Lydia as well as Lydia , ” said Lydia , “ Though Lydia am not Lydia particular friend . Lydia have just as much right to be asked as Lydia has , and more too , for Lydia am two years older . ” 
 
  In vain did Elizabeth attempt to make Lydia reasonable , and Jane to make Lydia resigned . As for Elizabeth herself , this invitation was so far from exciting in Elizabeth the same feelings as in Elizabeth mother and Lydia , that Elizabeth considered this invitation as the death warrant of all possibility of common sense for Lydia ; and detestable as such a step must make Elizabeth were it known , Elizabeth could not help secretly advising Elizabeth father not to let Elizabeth go . Elizabeth represented to Elizabeth father all the improprieties of Lydia ’s general behaviour , the little advantage Lydia could derive from the friendship of such a woman as Lydia , and the probability of Lydia being yet more imprudent with such a companion at Brighton , where the temptations must be greater than at home . Elizabeth father heard Elizabeth attentively , and then said : 
 
  “ Lydia will never be easy until Lydia has exposed Lydia in some public place or other , and we can never expect Lydia to do exposed with so little expense or inconvenience to Lydia family as under the present circumstances . ” 
 
  “ If Elizabeth father were aware , ” said Elizabeth , “ of the very great disadvantage to us all which must arise from the public notice of Lydia ’s unguarded and imprudent manner — nay , which has already arisen from it , Elizabeth am sure Elizabeth father would judge differently in the affair . ” 
 
  “ Already arisen ? ” repeated Elizabeth father . “ What , has Lydia frightened away some of Elizabeth lovers ? Poor little Elizabeth ! But do not be cast down . Such squeamish youths as can not bear to be connected with a little absurdity are not worth a regret . Come , let Elizabeth father see the list of pitiful fellows who have been kept aloof by Lydia ’s folly . ” 
 
  “ Indeed Elizabeth are mistaken . Elizabeth father have no such injuries to resent . It is not of particular , but of general evils , which Elizabeth father am now complaining . Our importance , our respectability in the world must be affected by the wild volatility , the assurance and disdain of all restraint which mark Lydia ’s character . Excuse Elizabeth , for Elizabeth must speak plainly . If Elizabeth father , Elizabeth father , will not take the trouble of checking Lydia exuberant spirits , and of teaching Lydia that Lydia present pursuits are not to be the business of Lydia life , Lydia will soon be beyond the reach of amendment . Lydia character will be fixed , and Lydia will , at sixteen , be the most determined flirt that ever made Lydia or Lydia family ridiculous ; a flirt , too , in the worst and meanest degree of flirtation ; without any attraction beyond youth and a tolerable person ; and , from the ignorance and emptiness of Lydia mind , wholly unable to ward off any portion of that universal contempt which Lydia rage for admiration will excite . In this danger Kitty also is comprehended . Kitty will follow wherever Lydia leads . Lydia Oh ! Elizabeth father , can Elizabeth father suppose it possible that they will not be censured and despised wherever they are known , and that they sisters will not be often involved in the disgrace ? ” 
 
  Elizabeth father saw that Elizabeth whole heart was in the subject , and affectionately taking Elizabeth hand said in reply : 
 
  “ Do not make Elizabeth uneasy , Elizabeth . Wherever Elizabeth and Jane are known Elizabeth must be respected and valued ; and Elizabeth will not appear to less advantage for having a couple of — or Elizabeth father may say , three — very silly sisters . We shall have no peace at Longbourn House if Lydia does not go to Brighton . Let Lydia go , then . the colonel of the regiment ’s is a sensible man , and will keep Lydia out of any real mischief ; and Lydia is luckily too poor to be an object of prey to anybody . At Brighton Lydia will be of less importance even as a common flirt than Lydia has been here . The officers will find women better worth The officers notice . Let Our hope , therefore , that Lydia being there may teach Lydia Lydia own insignificance . At any rate , Lydia can not grow many degrees worse , without authorising Our to lock Lydia up for the rest of Lydia life . ” 
 
  With this answer Elizabeth was forced to be content ; but Elizabeth own opinion continued the same , and Elizabeth left Elizabeth father disappointed and sorry . It was not in Elizabeth nature , however , to increase Elizabeth vexations by dwelling on Elizabeth vexations . Elizabeth was confident of having performed Elizabeth duty , and to fret over unavoidable evils , or augment unavoidable evils by anxiety , was no part of Elizabeth disposition . 
 
  Had Lydia and Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother known the substance of Lydia conference with Lydia father , Lydia and Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother indignation would hardly have found expression in Lydia and Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother united volubility . In Lydia ’s imagination , a visit to Brighton comprised every possibility of earthly happiness . Lydia saw , with the creative eye of fancy , the streets of that gay bathing - place covered with officers . Lydia saw Lydia the object of attention , to tens and to scores of them at present unknown . Lydia saw all the glories of the camp — the camp tents stretched forth in beauteous uniformity of lines , crowded with the young and the gay , and dazzling with scarlet ; and , to complete the view , Lydia saw Lydia seated beneath a tent , tenderly flirting with at least six officers at once . 
 
  Had Lydia known Lydia sister sought to tear Lydia from such prospects and such realities as these , what would have been Lydia sensations ? Lydia sensations could have been understood only by Lydia mother , who might have felt nearly the same . Lydia ’s going to Brighton was all that consoled Lydia for Lydia melancholy conviction of Lydia husband ’s never intending to go there Lydia husband ’s . 
 
  But Lydia and Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother were entirely ignorant of what had passed ; and Lydia and Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother raptures continued , with little intermission , to the very day of Lydia ’s leaving home . 
 
  Elizabeth was now to see Charlie for the last time . Having been frequently in company with Charlie since Elizabeth return , agitation was pretty well over ; the agitations of former partiality entirely so . Elizabeth had even learnt to detect , in the very gentleness which had first delighted Elizabeth , an affectation and a sameness to disgust and weary . In Charlie present behaviour to Elizabeth , moreover , Elizabeth had a fresh source of displeasure , for the inclination Charlie soon testified of renewing those intentions which had marked the early part of their acquaintance could only serve , after what had since passed , to provoke Elizabeth . Elizabeth lost all concern for Charlie in finding Elizabeth thus selected as the object of such idle and frivolous gallantry ; and while Elizabeth steadily repressed such idle and frivolous gallantry , could not but feel the reproof contained in Charlie believing , that however long , and for whatever cause , Charlie attentions had been withdrawn , Elizabeth vanity would be gratified , and Elizabeth preference secured at any time by Charlie attentions renewal . 
 
  On the very last day of the regiment ’s remaining at Meryton , Charlie dined , with others of the officers , at Longbourn House ; and so little was Elizabeth disposed to part from Charlie in good humour , that on Charlie making some enquiry as to the manner in which Elizabeth time had passed at Hunsford , Elizabeth mentioned Fitzwilam ’s and Fitzwilliam ’s having both spent three weeks at Rosings , and asked Charlie , if Charlie was acquainted with Fitzwilliam ’s . 
 
  Charlie looked surprised , displeased , alarmed ; but with a moment ’s recollection and a returning smile , replied , that Charlie had formerly seen Fitzwilliam ’s often ; and , after observing that Fitzwilliam ’s was a very gentlemanlike man , asked Elizabeth how Elizabeth had liked Fitzwilliam ’s . Elizabeth answer was warmly in Fitzwilliam ’s favour . With an air of indifference Charlie soon afterwards added : 
 
  “ How long did Elizabeth say Fitzwilliam ’s was at Rosings ? ” 
 
  “ Nearly three weeks . ” 
 
  “ And Elizabeth saw Fitzwilliam ’s frequently ? ” 
 
  “ Yes , almost every day . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam ’s manners are very different from Fitzwilliam ’s cousin ’s . ” 
 
  “ Yes , very different . But Elizabeth think Fitzwilliam ’s improves upon acquaintance . ” 
 
  “ Indeed ! ” cried Charlie with a look which did not escape Charlie . “ And pray , may Charlie ask ? — ” But checking Charlie , Charlie added , in a gayer tone , “ Is it in address that Fitzwilliam ’s improves ? Has Fitzwilliam ’s deigned to add aught of civility to Fitzwilliam ’s ordinary style?—for Charlie dare not hope , ” Charlie continued in a lower and more serious tone , “ that Fitzwilliam ’s is improved in essentials . ” 
 
  “ Oh , no ! ” said Elizabeth . “ In essentials , Elizabeth believe , Fitzwilliam ’s is very much what Fitzwilliam ’s ever was . ” 
 
  While Elizabeth spoke , Charlie looked as if scarcely knowing whether to rejoice over Elizabeth words , or to distrust Elizabeth words meaning . There was a something in Elizabeth countenance which made Charlie listen with an apprehensive and anxious attention , while Elizabeth added : 
 
  “ When Elizabeth said that Fitzwilliam ’s improved on acquaintance , Elizabeth did not mean that Fitzwilliam ’s mind or Fitzwilliam ’s manners were in a state of improvement , but that , from knowing Fitzwilliam ’s better , Fitzwilliam ’s disposition was better understood . ” 
 
  Charlie alarm now appeared in a heightened complexion and agitated look ; for a few minutes Charlie was silent , till , shaking off Charlie embarrassment , Charlie turned to Elizabeth again , and said in the gentlest of accents : 
 
  “ Elizabeth , will readily comprehend how sincerely Charlie must rejoice that Fitzwilliam ’s is wise enough to assume even the appearance of what is right . Fitzwilliam ’s pride , in that direction , may be of service , if not to Fitzwilliam ’s , to many others , for Fitzwilliam ’s pride must only deter Fitzwilliam ’s from such foul misconduct as Charlie have suffered by . Charlie only fear that the sort of cautiousness to which Elizabeth , Charlie imagine , have been alluding , is merely adopted on Fitzwilliam ’s visits to Fitzwilliam ’s aunt , of whose good opinion and judgement Fitzwilliam ’s stands much in awe . Fitzwilliam ’s fear of Fitzwilliam ’s aunt , of whose good opinion and judgement Fitzwilliam ’s stands much in awe has always operated , Charlie know , when they were together ; and a good deal is to be imputed to Fitzwilliam ’s wish of forwarding the match with Cathleen , which Charlie am certain Fitzwilliam ’s has very much at heart . ” 
 
  Elizabeth could not repress a smile at this , but Elizabeth answered only by a slight inclination of the head . Elizabeth saw that Charlie wanted to engage Elizabeth on the old subject of Charlie grievances , and Elizabeth was in no humour to indulge Charlie . The rest of the evening passed with the appearance , on Charlie side , of usual cheerfulness , but with no further attempt to distinguish Elizabeth ; and Lydia and Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother parted at last with mutual civility , and possibly a mutual desire of never meeting again . 
 
  When the party broke up , Lydia returned with Lydia to Meryton , from whence they were to set out early the next morning . The separation between Lydia and Lydia family was rather noisy than pathetic . Kitty was the only one who shed tears ; but Kitty did weep from vexation and envy . Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother was diffuse in Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother good wishes for the felicity of Lydia , and impressive in Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother injunctions that Lydia should not miss the opportunity of enjoying Lydia as much as possible — advice which there was every reason to believe would be well attended to ; and in the clamorous happiness of Lydia herself in bidding farewell , the more gentle adieus of Lydia sisters were uttered without being heard . 
 Chapter 
 
  Had Elizabeth ’s opinion been all drawn from Elizabeth ’s own family , Elizabeth ’s could not have formed a very pleasing opinion of conjugal felicity or domestic comfort . Elizabeth ’s father , captivated by youth and beauty , and that appearance of good humour which youth and beauty generally give , had married a woman whose weak understanding and illiberal mind had very early in their marriage put an end to all real affection for a woman whose weak understanding and illiberal mind had very early in their marriage put an end to all real affection for . Respect , esteem , and confidence had vanished for ever ; and all Elizabeth ’s father views of domestic happiness were overthrown . But Elizabeth ’s father was not of a disposition to seek comfort for the disappointment which Elizabeth ’s father own imprudence had brought on , in any of those pleasures which too often console the unfortunate for the unfortunate folly or the unfortunate vice . Elizabeth ’s father was fond of the country and of books ; and from these tastes had arisen Elizabeth ’s father principal enjoyments . To Elizabeth ’s father wife Elizabeth ’s father was very little otherwise indebted , than as Elizabeth ’s father wife ignorance and folly had contributed to Elizabeth ’s father amusement . This is not the sort of happiness which a man would in general wish to owe to a man wife ; but where other powers of entertainment are wanting , the true philosopher will derive benefit from such as are given . 
 
  Elizabeth ’s , however , had never been blind to the impropriety of Elizabeth ’s father ’s behaviour as a husband . Elizabeth ’s had always seen Elizabeth ’s father ’s behaviour as a husband with pain ; but respecting Elizabeth ’s father abilities , and grateful for Elizabeth ’s father affectionate treatment of Elizabeth ’s , Elizabeth ’s endeavoured to forget what Elizabeth ’s could not overlook , and to banish from Elizabeth ’s thoughts that continual breach of conjugal obligation and decorum which , in exposing Elizabeth ’s father wife to the contempt of Elizabeth ’s father wife own children , was so highly reprehensible . But Elizabeth ’s had never felt so strongly as now the disadvantages which must attend the children of so unsuitable a marriage , nor ever been so fully aware of the evils arising from so ill - judged a direction of talents ; talents , which , rightly used , might at least have preserved the respectability of Elizabeth ’s father daughters , even if incapable of enlarging the mind of Elizabeth ’s father wife . 
 
  When Elizabeth ’s had rejoiced over George ’s departure Elizabeth ’s found little other cause for satisfaction in the loss of the regiment . Their parties abroad were less varied than before , and at home Elizabeth ’s had a mother and sister whose constant repinings at the dullness of everything around a mother and sister whose constant repinings at the dullness of everything around threw a real gloom over a mother and sister whose constant repinings at the dullness of everything around domestic circle ; and , though Kitty might in time regain Kitty natural degree of sense , since the disturbers of Elizabeth ’s brain were removed , Elizabeth ’s other sister , from whose disposition greater evil might be apprehended , was likely to be hardened in all Elizabeth ’s other sister , from whose disposition greater evil might be apprehended folly and assurance by a situation of such double danger as a watering - place and a camp . Upon the whole , therefore , Elizabeth ’s found , what has been sometimes found before , that an event to which Elizabeth ’s had looked forward with impatient desire did not , in taking place , bring all the satisfaction Elizabeth ’s had promised Elizabeth ’s . It was consequently necessary to name some other period for the commencement of actual felicity — to have some other point on which Elizabeth ’s wishes and hopes might be fixed , and by again enjoying the pleasure of anticipation , console Elizabeth ’s for the present , and prepare for another disappointment . Elizabeth ’s tour to the Lakes was now the object of Elizabeth ’s happiest thoughts ; Elizabeth ’s tour to the Lakes was Elizabeth ’s best consolation for all the uncomfortable hours which the discontentedness of Elizabeth ’s mother and Kitty made inevitable ; and could Elizabeth ’s have included Kitty in the scheme , every part of the scheme would have been perfect . 
 
  “ But it is fortunate , ” thought Elizabeth ’s , “ that Elizabeth ’s have something to wish for . Were the whole arrangement complete , Elizabeth ’s disappointment would be certain . But here , by carrying with Elizabeth ’s one ceaseless source of regret in Elizabeth ’s sister ’s absence , Elizabeth ’s may reasonably hope to have all Elizabeth ’s expectations of pleasure realised . A scheme of which every part promises delight can never be successful ; and general disappointment is only warded off by the defence of some little peculiar vexation . ” 
 
  When Elizabeth ’s went away Elizabeth ’s promised to write very often and very minutely to Elizabeth ’s mother and Kitty ; but Elizabeth ’s letters were always long expected , and always very short . Those to Elizabeth ’s father wife contained little else than that they were just returned from the library , where such and such officers had attended they , and where Elizabeth ’s had seen such beautiful ornaments as made Elizabeth ’s quite wild ; that Elizabeth ’s had a new gown , or a new parasol , which Elizabeth ’s would have described more fully , but was obliged to leave off in a violent hurry , as Mrs. Forster called Elizabeth ’s , and they were going off to the camp ; and from Elizabeth ’s correspondence with Elizabeth ’s sister , there was still less to be learnt — for Elizabeth ’s letters to Kitty , though rather longer , were much too full of lines under the words to be made public . 
 
  After the first fortnight or three weeks of Elizabeth ’s absence , health , good humour , and cheerfulness began to reappear at Longbourn . Everything wore a happier aspect . The families who had been in town for the winter came back again , and summer finery and summer engagements arose . Elizabeth ’s father wife was restored to Elizabeth ’s father wife usual querulous serenity ; and , by the middle of June , Kitty was so much recovered as to be able to enter Meryton without tears ; an event of such happy promise as to make Elizabeth ’s hope that by the following Christmas Elizabeth ’s might be so tolerably reasonable as not to mention an officer above once a day , unless , by some cruel and malicious arrangement at the War Office , another regiment should be quartered in Meryton . 
 
  The time fixed for the beginning of Edward and Madeline northern tour was now fast approaching , and a fortnight only was wanting of The time fixed for the beginning of Edward and Madeline northern tour , when a letter arrived from Madeline , which at once delayed Edward and Madeline northern tour commencement and curtailed Edward and Madeline northern tour extent . Edward would be prevented by business from setting out till a fortnight later in July , and must be in London again within a month , and as that left too short a period for Edward and Madeline to go so far , and see so much as Edward and Madeline had proposed , or at least to see it with the leisure and comfort Edward and Madeline had built on , Edward and Madeline were obliged to give up the Lakes , and substitute a more contracted tour , and , according to the present plan , were to go no farther northwards than Derbyshire . In Derbyshire there was enough to be seen to occupy the chief of Edward and Madeline three weeks ; and to Madeline Madeline had a peculiarly strong attraction . Madeline , was probably as great an object of Elizabeth ’s curiosity as all the celebrated beauties of Matlock , Chatsworth , Dovedale , or the Peak . 
 
  Elizabeth ’s was excessively disappointed ; Elizabeth ’s had set Elizabeth ’s heart on seeing the Lakes , and still thought there might have been time enough . But it was Elizabeth ’s business to be satisfied — and certainly Elizabeth ’s temper to be happy ; and all was soon right again . 
 
  With the mention of Derbyshire there were many ideas connected . It was impossible for Elizabeth ’s to see the word without thinking of Pemberley and the word owner . “ But surely , ” said Elizabeth ’s , “ Elizabeth ’s may enter Derbyshire with impunity , and rob Derbyshire of a few petrified spars without the word owner perceiving Elizabeth ’s . ” 
 
  The period of expectation was now doubled . Four weeks were to pass away before Elizabeth ’s uncle and aunt ’s arrival . But Elizabeth ’s uncle and aunt ’s did pass away , and Edward and Madeline , with Edward and Madeline four children , did at length appear at Longbourn . Edward and Madeline four children , were to be left under the particular care of Edward and Madeline four children cousin Jane , who was the general favourite , and whose steady sense and sweetness of temper exactly adapted Kitty for attending to Edward and Madeline four children in every way — teaching Edward and Madeline four children , playing with Edward and Madeline four children , and loving Edward and Madeline four children . 
 
  Edward and Madeline stayed only one night at Longbourn , and set off the next morning with Elizabeth ’s in pursuit of novelty and amusement . One enjoyment was certain — that of suitableness of companions ; a suitableness which comprehended health and temper to bear inconveniences — cheerfulness to enhance every pleasure — and affection and intelligence , which might supply it among Edward and Madeline if there were disappointments abroad . 
 
  It is not the object of this work to give a description of Derbyshire , nor of any of the remarkable places through which Edward and Madeline route thither lay ; Oxford , Blenheim , Warwick , Kenilworth , Birmingham , etc . are sufficiently known . A small part of Derbyshire is all the present concern . To the little town of Lambton , the scene of Madeline ’s former residence , and where Madeline had lately learned some acquaintance still remained , Edward and Madeline bent Edward and Madeline steps , after having seen all the principal wonders of Derbyshire ; and within five miles of the little town of Lambton , the scene of Madeline ’s former residence , and where Madeline had lately learned some acquaintance still remained , Elizabeth ’s found from Madeline that Pemberley was situated . Pemberley was not in Edward and Madeline direct road , nor more than a mile or two out of Edward and Madeline direct road . In talking over Edward and Madeline route the evening before , Madeline expressed an inclination to see Pemberley again . Edward declared Edward willingness , and Elizabeth ’s was applied to for Elizabeth ’s approbation . 
 
  “ Madeline love , should not Elizabeth ’s like to see a place of which Elizabeth ’s have heard so much ? ” said Elizabeth ’s aunt ; “ a place , too , with which so many of Elizabeth ’s acquaintances are connected . George ’s passed all George ’s youth there , Elizabeth ’s know . ” 
 
  Elizabeth ’s was distressed . Elizabeth ’s felt that Elizabeth ’s had no business at Pemberley , and was obliged to assume a disinclination for seeing Pemberley . Elizabeth ’s must own that Elizabeth ’s was tired of seeing great houses ; after going over so many , Elizabeth ’s really had no pleasure in fine carpets or satin curtains . 
 
  Madeline abused Madeline stupidity . “ If Pemberley were merely a fine house richly furnished , ” said Madeline , “ Madeline should not care about Pemberley Madeline ; but the grounds are delightful . They have some of the finest woods in the country . ” 
 
  Elizabeth ’s said no more — but Elizabeth ’s mind could not acquiesce . The possibility of meeting Fitzwilliam , while viewing Pemberley , instantly occurred . meeting would be dreadful ! Elizabeth ’s blushed at The possibility of meeting Fitzwilliam , while viewing Pemberley , and thought it would be better to speak openly to Elizabeth ’s aunt than to run such a risk . But against this there were objections ; and Elizabeth ’s finally resolved that it could be the last resource , if Elizabeth ’s private enquiries to the absence of the family were unfavourably answered . 
 
  Accordingly , when Elizabeth ’s retired at night , Elizabeth ’s asked the chambermaid whether Pemberley were not a very fine place ? what was the name of Pemberley proprietor ? and , with no little alarm , whether the family were down for the summer ? A most welcome negative followed the last question — and Elizabeth ’s alarms now being removed , Elizabeth ’s was at leisure to feel a great deal of curiosity to see Pemberley Elizabeth ’s ; and when the subject was revived the next morning , and Elizabeth ’s was again applied to , could readily answer , and with a proper air of indifference , that Elizabeth ’s had not really any dislike to the scheme . To Pemberley , therefore , they were to go . 
 Chapter 
 
  Elizabeth , as 
 
  drove along , watched for the first appearance of Pemberley Woods with some perturbation ; and when at length 
 
  turned in at the lodge , Elizabeth spirits were in a high flutter . 
 
  The park was very large , and contained great variety of ground . 
 
  entered The park in one of The park lowest points , and drove for some time through a beautiful wood stretching over a wide extent . 
 
  Elizabeth ’s mind was too full for conversation , but Elizabeth saw and admired every remarkable spot and point of view . 
 
  gradually ascended for half - a - mile , and then found 
 
  at the top of a considerable eminence , where a beautiful wood stretching over a wide extent ceased , and the eye was instantly caught by Pemberley House , situated on the opposite side of a valley , into which the road with some abruptness wound . Pemberley House , situated on the opposite side of a valley , into which the road with some abruptness wound was a large , handsome stone building , standing well on rising ground , and backed by a ridge of high woody hills ; and in front , a stream of some natural importance was swelled into greater , but without any artificial appearance . a stream of some natural importance banks were neither formal nor falsely adorned . Elizabeth was delighted . Elizabeth had never seen a place for which nature had done more , or where natural beauty had been so little counteracted by an awkward taste . They were all of them warm in They admiration ; and at that moment Elizabeth felt that to be mistress of Pemberley might be something ! 
 
  
 
  descended the hill , crossed the bridge , and drove to the door ; and , while examining the nearer aspect of Pemberley House , situated on the opposite side of a valley , into which the road with some abruptness wound , all Elizabeth apprehension of meeting Pemberley House , situated on the opposite side of a valley , into which the road with some abruptness wound owner returned . Elizabeth dreaded lest the chambermaid had been mistaken . On applying to see Pemberley House , situated on the opposite side of a valley , into which the road with some abruptness wound , 
 
  were admitted into the hall ; and Elizabeth , as 
 
  waited for the housekeeper , had leisure to wonder at the housekeeper being where the housekeeper was . the housekeeper The housekeeper came ; the housekeeper the housekeeper . 
 
  followed the housekeeper into the dining - parlour . the dining - parlour was a large , well proportioned room , handsomely fitted up . Elizabeth , after slightly surveying the dining - parlour , went to a window to enjoy the dining - parlour prospect . The hill , crowned with wood , which 
 
  had descended , receiving increased abruptness from the distance , was a beautiful object . Every disposition of the ground was good ; and Elizabeth looked on the whole scene , the river , the trees scattered on the river banks and the winding of a valley , into which the road with some abruptness wound , as far as Elizabeth could trace it , with delight . As 
 
  passed into other rooms these objects were taking different positions ; but from every window there were beauties to be seen . The rooms were lofty and handsome , and The rooms furniture suitable to the fortune of The rooms proprietor ; but Elizabeth saw , with admiration of Pemberley House , situated on the opposite side of a valley , into which the road with some abruptness wound owner taste , that it was neither gaudy nor uselessly fine ; with less of splendour , and more real elegance , than the furniture of Rosings . 
 
  “ And of The rooms , ” thought Elizabeth , “ Elizabeth might have been mistress ! With The rooms Elizabeth might now have been familiarly acquainted ! Instead of viewing The rooms as a stranger , Elizabeth might have rejoiced in The rooms as Elizabeth own , and welcomed to The rooms as visitors Elizabeth uncle and aunt . But no,”—recollecting herself—“that could never be ; Elizabeth uncle and aunt would have been lost to Elizabeth ; Elizabeth should not have been allowed to invite Elizabeth uncle and aunt . ” 
 
  This was a lucky recollection — This saved Elizabeth from something very like regret . 
 
  Elizabeth longed to enquire of the housekeeper whether the housekeeper master was really absent , but had not the courage for enquire . At length however , the question was asked by Elizabeth uncle ; and Elizabeth turned away with alarm , while Mrs. Reynolds replied that the housekeeper master was , adding , “ But we expect the housekeeper master to - morrow , with a large party of friends . ” How rejoiced was Elizabeth that 
 
  own journey had not by any circumstance been delayed a day ! 
 
  Elizabeth aunt now called Elizabeth to look at a picture . Elizabeth approached and saw the likeness of Charlie , suspended , amongst several other miniatures , over the mantelpiece . Elizabeth aunt asked Elizabeth , smilingly , how Elizabeth liked a picture . The housekeeper came forward , and told 
 
  a picture was a picture of a young gentleman , the son of the housekeeper master steward , who had been brought up by the housekeeper master at the housekeeper master own expense . “ a young gentleman , the son of the housekeeper master steward , who had been brought up by the housekeeper master at the housekeeper master own expense is now gone into the army , ” the housekeeper added ; “ but the housekeeper am afraid a young gentleman , the son of the housekeeper master steward , who had been brought up by the housekeeper master at the housekeeper master own expense has turned out very wild . ” 
 
  Madeline looked at Madeline niece with a smile , but Elizabeth could not return a smile . 
 
  “ And that , ” said Mrs. Reynolds , pointing to another of the miniatures , “ is Mrs. Reynolds master — and very like the housekeeper master . another of the miniatures was drawn at the same time as the other — about eight years ago . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth have heard much of the housekeeper master fine person , ” said Madeline , looking at a picture ; “ it is a handsome face . But , Elizabeth , Elizabeth can tell 
 
  whether it is like or not . ” Mrs. Reynolds Mrs. Reynolds respect for Elizabeth seemed to increase on this intimation of Elizabeth knowing Elizabeth master . 
 
  “ Does Elizabeth know Fitzwilliam ? ” 
 
  Elizabeth coloured , and said : “ A little . ” 
 
  “ And do not Elizabeth think Fitzwilliam a very handsome gentleman , Elizabeth ? ” 
 
  “ Yes , very handsome . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth am sure Elizabeth know none so handsome ; but in the gallery up stairs you will see a finer , larger picture of Fitzwilliam than a picture . This room was the housekeeper master favourite room , and the miniatures are just as the miniatures used to be then . the housekeeper master was very fond of the miniatures . ” 
 
  This accounted to Elizabeth for Charlie ’s being among the miniatures . Mrs. Reynolds Mrs. Reynolds then directed 
 
  attention to one of Georgiana , drawn when Georgiana was only eight years old . 
 
  “ And is Georgiana as handsome as Georgiana brother ? ” said Madeline . 
 
  “ Oh ! yes — the handsomest young lady that ever was seen ; and so accomplished!—She plays and sings all day long . In the next room is a new instrument just come down for Georgiana — a present from Elizabeth master ; Georgiana comes here to - morrow with the housekeeper master . ” 
 
  Edward , whose manners were very easy and pleasant , encouraged Elizabeth communicativeness by Edward , whose manners were very easy and pleasant questions and remarks ; Mrs. Reynolds , either by pride or attachment , had evidently great pleasure in talking of Mrs. Reynolds master and Georgiana . 
 
  “ Is the housekeeper master much at Pemberley in the course of the year ? ” 
 
  “ Not so much as Elizabeth could wish , Edward , whose manners were very easy and pleasant ; but Elizabeth dare say the housekeeper master may spend half the housekeeper master time here ; and Georgiana is always down for the summer months . ” 
 
  “ Except , ” thought Elizabeth , “ when Georgiana goes to Ramsgate . ” 
 
  “ If the housekeeper master would marry , Elizabeth might see more of the housekeeper master . ” 
 
  “ Yes , Edward , whose manners were very easy and pleasant ; but Elizabeth do not know when marry will be . Elizabeth do not know who is good enough for the housekeeper master . ” 
 
  
 
  smiled . Elizabeth could not help saying , “ It is very much to the housekeeper master credit , Elizabeth am sure , that Madeline should think so . ” 
 
  “ Madeline say no more than the truth , and everybody will say that knows the housekeeper master , ” replied Madeline . Elizabeth thought this was going pretty far ; and Elizabeth listened with increasing astonishment as the housekeeper added , “ the housekeeper have never known a cross word from the housekeeper master in the housekeeper life , and the housekeeper have known the housekeeper master ever since the housekeeper master was four years old . ” 
 
  This was praise , of all others most extraordinary , most opposite to Elizabeth ideas . That the housekeeper master was not a good - tempered man had been the housekeeper firmest opinion . Elizabeth keenest attention was awakened ; Elizabeth longed to hear more , and was grateful to Elizabeth uncle for saying : 
 
  “ There are very few people of whom so much can be said . Elizabeth are lucky in having the housekeeper master . ” 
 
  “ Yes , Edward , whose manners were very easy and pleasant , Elizabeth know Elizabeth am . If Elizabeth were to go through the world , Elizabeth could not meet with a better . But Elizabeth have always observed , that they who are good - natured when children , are good - natured when they who are good - natured when children grow up ; and the housekeeper master was always the sweetest - tempered , most generous - hearted boy in the world . ” 
 
  Elizabeth almost stared at the housekeeper . “ Can the housekeeper be Fitzwilliam ? ” thought Elizabeth . 
 
  “ the housekeeper master father was an excellent man , ” said Madeline . 
 
  “ Yes , Elizabeth , that the housekeeper master father was indeed ; and the housekeeper master father son will be just like the housekeeper master father — just as affable to the poor . ” 
 
  Elizabeth listened , wondered , doubted , and was impatient for more . Mrs. Reynolds could interest Elizabeth on no other point . Mrs. Reynolds related the subjects of the pictures , the dimensions of the rooms , and the price of the furniture , in vain . Edward , whose manners were very easy and pleasant , highly amused by the kind of family prejudice to which Edward , whose manners were very easy and pleasant attributed Mrs. Reynolds excessive commendation of Mrs. Reynolds master , soon led again to the subject ; and Mrs. Reynolds dwelt with energy on the housekeeper master many merits as 
 
  proceeded together up the great staircase . 
 
  “ the housekeeper master is the best landlord , and the best master , ” said Mrs. Reynolds , “ that ever lived ; not like the wild young men nowadays , who think of nothing but the wild young men nowadays , who think of nothing but . There is not one of the housekeeper master tenants or servants but will give the housekeeper master a good name . Some people call the housekeeper master proud ; but Edward , whose manners were very easy and pleasant am sure Edward , whose manners were very easy and pleasant never saw anything of it . To Edward , whose manners were very easy and pleasant fancy , it is only because the housekeeper master does not rattle away like other young men . ” 
 
  “ In what an amiable light does this place the housekeeper master ! ” thought Elizabeth . 
 
  “ This fine account of the housekeeper master , ” whispered Elizabeth aunt as 
 
  walked , “ is not quite consistent with the housekeeper master behaviour to the housekeeper master . ” 
 
  “ Perhaps 
 
  might be deceived . ” 
 
  “ be is not very likely ; 
 
  authority was too good . ” 
 
  On reaching the spacious lobby above 
 
  were shown into a very pretty sitting - room , lately fitted up with greater elegance and lightness than the apartments below ; and were informed that fitted was but just done to give pleasure to Georgiana , who had taken a liking to a very pretty sitting - room , lately fitted up with greater elegance and lightness than the apartments below when last at Pemberley . 
 
  “ the housekeeper master is certainly a good brother , ” said Elizabeth , as Elizabeth walked towards one of the windows . Mrs. Reynolds Mrs. Reynolds anticipated Georgiana ’s delight , when Georgiana should enter a very pretty sitting - room , lately fitted up with greater elegance and lightness than the apartments below . “ And this is always the way with the housekeeper master , ” Mrs. Reynolds added . “ Whatever can give Georgiana any pleasure is sure to be done in a moment . There is nothing the housekeeper master would not do for Georgiana . ” 
 
  The picture - gallery , and two or three of the principal bedrooms , were all that remained to be shown . In The picture - gallery were many good paintings ; but Elizabeth knew nothing of the art ; and from such as had been already visible below , Elizabeth had willingly turned to look at some drawings of Georgiana ’s , in crayons , whose subjects were usually more interesting , and also more intelligible . 
 
  In The picture - gallery there were many family portraits , but many family portraits could have little to fix the attention of a stranger . Elizabeth walked in quest of the only face whose features would be known to Elizabeth . At last the only face whose features would be known to Elizabeth arrested Elizabeth — and Elizabeth beheld a striking resemblance to Fitzwilliam , with such a smile over the face as Elizabeth remembered to have sometimes seen when Fitzwilliam looked at Elizabeth . Elizabeth stood several minutes before the only face whose features would be known to Elizabeth , in earnest contemplation , and returned to the only face whose features would be known to Elizabeth again before 
 
  quitted The picture - gallery . Mrs. Reynolds informed 
 
  that the only face whose features would be known to Elizabeth had been taken in the housekeeper master father ’s lifetime . 
 
  There was certainly at this moment , in Elizabeth ’s mind , a more gentle sensation towards the only face whose features would be known to Elizabeth than Elizabeth had ever felt at the height of their acquaintance . The commendation bestowed on the housekeeper master by Mrs. Reynolds was of no trifling nature . What praise is more valuable than the praise of an intelligent servant ? As a brother , a landlord , a master , Elizabeth considered how many people ’s happiness were in the housekeeper master guardianship!—how much of pleasure or pain was it in the housekeeper master power to bestow!—how much of good or evil must be done by the housekeeper master ! Every idea that had been brought forward by the housekeeper was favourable to the housekeeper master character , and as Elizabeth stood before the canvas on which the housekeeper master was represented , and fixed the housekeeper master eyes upon Elizabeth , Elizabeth thought of the housekeeper master regard with a deeper sentiment of gratitude than it had ever raised before ; Elizabeth remembered the housekeeper master regard warmth , and softened the housekeeper master regard impropriety of expression . 
 
  When all of the house that was open to general inspection had been seen , 
 
  returned downstairs , and , taking leave of the housekeeper , were consigned over to the gardener , who met 
 
  at the hall - door . 
 
  As 
 
  walked across the hall towards the river , Elizabeth turned back to look again ; Elizabeth uncle and aunt stopped also , and while the former was conjecturing as to the date of Pemberley House , situated on the opposite side of a valley , into which the road with some abruptness wound , the housekeeper master the housekeeper master suddenly came forward from the road , which led behind Pemberley House , situated on the opposite side of a valley , into which the road with some abruptness wound to the stables . 
 
  
 
  were within twenty yards of each other , and so abrupt was the housekeeper master appearance , that it was impossible to avoid the housekeeper master sight . 
 
  eyes instantly met , and the cheeks of 
 
  were overspread with the deepest blush . the housekeeper master absolutely started , and for a moment seemed immovable from surprise ; but shortly recovering the housekeeper master , advanced towards 
 
  , and spoke to Elizabeth , if not in terms of perfect composure , at least of perfect civility . 
 
  Elizabeth had instinctively turned away ; but stopping on the housekeeper master approach , received the housekeeper master compliments with an embarrassment impossible to be overcome . Had the housekeeper master first appearance , or the housekeeper master resemblance to the picture 
 
  had just been examining , been insufficient to assure the other two that the other two now saw Fitzwilliam , the gardener , who met 
 
  at the hall - door expression of surprise , on beholding the housekeeper master , must immediately have told it . the other two stood a little aloof while the housekeeper master was talking to the other two niece , who , astonished and confused , scarcely dared lift Elizabeth eyes to the housekeeper master face , and knew not what answer Elizabeth returned to the housekeeper master civil enquiries after Elizabeth family . Amazed at the alteration of the housekeeper master manner since their last parted , every sentence that the housekeeper master uttered was increasing Elizabeth embarrassment ; and every idea of the impropriety of Elizabeth being found there recurring to Elizabeth mind , the few minutes in which their continued were some of the most uncomfortable in Elizabeth life . Nor did the housekeeper master seem much more at ease ; when the housekeeper master spoke , the housekeeper master accent had none of the housekeeper master accent usual sedateness ; and the housekeeper master repeated the housekeeper master enquiries as to the time of Elizabeth having left Longbourn , and of Elizabeth stay in Derbyshire , so often , and in so hurried a way , as plainly spoke the distraction of the housekeeper master thoughts . 
 
  At length every idea seemed to fail the housekeeper master ; and , after standing a few moments without saying a word , the housekeeper master suddenly recollected the housekeeper master , and took leave . 
 
  the other two then joined Elizabeth , and expressed admiration of the housekeeper master figure ; but Elizabeth heard not a word , and wholly engrossed by Elizabeth own feelings , followed the other two in silence . Elizabeth was overpowered by shame and vexation . Elizabeth coming there was the most unfortunate , the most ill - judged thing in the world ! How strange it must appear to the housekeeper master ! In what a disgraceful light might it not strike so vain a man ! It might seem as if Elizabeth had purposely thrown Elizabeth in the housekeeper master way again ! Oh ! why did Elizabeth come ? Or , why did the housekeeper master thus come a day before the housekeeper master was expected ? Had they been only ten minutes sooner , they should have been beyond the reach of the housekeeper master discrimination ; for it was plain that the housekeeper master was that moment arrived — that moment alighted from the housekeeper master horse or the housekeeper master carriage . Elizabeth blushed again and again over the perverseness of the meeting . And the housekeeper master behaviour , so strikingly altered — what could it mean ? That the housekeeper master should even speak to Elizabeth was amazing!—but to speak with such civility , to enquire after Elizabeth family ! Never in Elizabeth life had Elizabeth seen the housekeeper master manners so little dignified , never had the housekeeper master spoken with such gentleness as on the meeting . What a contrast did it offer to the housekeeper master last address in Rosings Park , when the housekeeper master put the housekeeper master letter into Elizabeth hand ! Elizabeth knew not what to think , or how to account for it . 
 
  
 
  had now entered a beautiful walk by the side of the water , and every step was bringing forward a nobler fall of ground , or a finer reach of the woods to which 
 
  were approaching ; but it was some time before Elizabeth was sensible of any of it ; and , though Elizabeth answered mechanically to the repeated appeals of Elizabeth uncle and aunt , and seemed to direct Elizabeth eyes to such objects as 
 
  pointed out , Elizabeth distinguished no part of the scene . Elizabeth thoughts were all fixed on that one spot of Pemberley House , situated on the opposite side of a valley , into which the road with some abruptness wound , whichever that one spot of Pemberley House , situated on the opposite side of a valley , into which the road with some abruptness wound , whichever might be , where Fitzwilliam then was . Elizabeth longed to know what at the moment was passing in Fitzwilliam mind — in what manner Fitzwilliam thought of Elizabeth , and whether , in defiance of everything , Elizabeth was still dear to Fitzwilliam . Perhaps Fitzwilliam had been civil only because Fitzwilliam felt Fitzwilliam at ease ; yet there had been that in Fitzwilliam voice which was not like ease . Whether Fitzwilliam had felt more of pain or of pleasure in seeing Elizabeth Elizabeth could not tell , but Fitzwilliam certainly had not seen Elizabeth with composure . 
 
  At length , however , the remarks of the other two on Elizabeth absence of mind aroused Elizabeth , and Elizabeth felt the necessity of appearing more like Elizabeth . 
 
  
 
  entered the woods , and bidding adieu to the river for a while , ascended some of the higher grounds ; when , in spots where the opening of the trees gave the eye power to wander , were many charming views of a valley , into which the road with some abruptness wound , the opposite hills , with the long range of woods overspreading many , and occasionally part of a stream of some natural importance . Edward , whose manners were very easy and pleasant expressed a wish of going round The park , but feared it might be beyond a walk . With a triumphant smile 
 
  were told that The park was ten miles round . was settled the matter ; and 
 
  pursued the accustomed circuit ; which brought 
 
  again , after some time , in a descent among hanging woods , to the edge of the water , and one of the water narrowest parts . 
 
  crossed the water by a simple bridge , in character with the general air of the scene ; one of the water narrowest parts was a spot less adorned than any 
 
  had yet visited ; and the valley , here contracted into a glen , allowed room only for a stream of some natural importance , and a narrow walk amidst the rough coppice - wood which bordered a stream of some natural importance . Elizabeth longed to explore a stream of some natural importance windings ; but when 
 
  had crossed the bridge , and perceived 
 
  distance from Pemberley House , situated on the opposite side of a valley , into which the road with some abruptness wound , Madeline , who was not a great walker , could go no farther , and thought only of returning to the carriage as quickly as possible . Madeline niece was , therefore , obliged to submit , and 
 
  took 
 
  way towards Pemberley House , situated on the opposite side of a valley , into which the road with some abruptness wound , in the nearest direction ; but 
 
  progress was slow , for Edward , whose manners were very easy and pleasant , was very fond of fishing , and was so much engaged in watching the occasional appearance of some trout in the water , and talking to the man about some trout , that Edward , whose manners were very easy and pleasant advanced but little . Whilst wandering on in this slow manner , 
 
  were again surprised , and Elizabeth ’s astonishment was quite equal to what Elizabeth ’s astonishment had been at first , by the sight of Fitzwilliam approaching 
 
  , and at no great distance . The walk being here less sheltered than on the other side , allowed 
 
  to see Fitzwilliam before 
 
  met . Elizabeth , however astonished , was at least more prepared for an interview than before , and resolved to appear and to speak with calmness , if the housekeeper master really intended to meet 
 
  . For a few moments , indeed , Elizabeth felt that the housekeeper master would probably strike into some other path . The idea lasted while a turning in the walk concealed the housekeeper master from 
 
  view ; the turning past , the housekeeper master was immediately before 
 
  . With a glance , Elizabeth saw that the housekeeper master had lost none of the housekeeper master recent civility ; and , to imitate the housekeeper master politeness , Elizabeth began , as 
 
  met , to admire the beauty of The rooms ; but Elizabeth had not got beyond the words “ delightful , ” and “ charming , ” when some unlucky recollections obtruded , and Elizabeth fancied that praise of Pemberley from Elizabeth might be mischievously construed . Elizabeth colour changed , and Elizabeth said no more . 
 
  Madeline was standing a little behind ; and on Madeline pausing , the housekeeper master asked Madeline if Madeline would do the housekeeper master the honour of introducing the housekeeper master to Madeline friends . asked was a stroke of civility for which Madeline was quite unprepared ; and Madeline could hardly suppress a smile at the housekeeper master being now seeking the acquaintance of some of those very people against whom the housekeeper master pride had revolted in the housekeeper master offer to Madeline . “ What will be the housekeeper master surprise , ” thought Madeline , “ when the housekeeper master knows who some of those very people against whom the housekeeper master pride had revolted in the housekeeper master offer to Madeline are ? the housekeeper master takes some of those very people against whom the housekeeper master pride had revolted in the housekeeper master offer to Madeline now for people of fashion . ” 
 
  The introduction , however , was immediately made ; and as Madeline named some of those very people against whom the housekeeper master pride had revolted in the housekeeper master offer to Madeline relationship to Madeline , Madeline stole a sly look at the housekeeper master , to see how the housekeeper master bore it , and was not without the expectation of the housekeeper master decamping as fast as the housekeeper master could from such disgraceful companions . That the housekeeper master was surprised by the connection was evident ; the housekeeper master sustained the connection , however , with fortitude , and so far from going away , turned back with 
 
  , and entered into conversation with Edward , whose manners were very easy and pleasant . Elizabeth could not but be pleased , could not but triumph . It was consoling that the housekeeper master should know Elizabeth had some relations for whom there was no need to blush . Elizabeth listened most attentively to all that passed between their , and gloried in every expression , every sentence of Elizabeth uncle , which marked Elizabeth uncle intelligence , Elizabeth uncle taste , or Elizabeth uncle good manners . 
 
  The conversation soon turned upon fishing ; and Elizabeth heard Fitzwilliam invite Elizabeth uncle , with the greatest civility , to fish there as often as Elizabeth uncle chose while Elizabeth uncle continued in the neighbourhood , offering at the same time to supply Elizabeth uncle with fishing tackle , and pointing out those parts of a stream of some natural importance where there was usually most sport . Madeline , who was walking arm - in - arm with Elizabeth , gave Elizabeth a look expressive of wonder . Elizabeth said nothing , but it gratified Elizabeth exceedingly ; the compliment must be all for Elizabeth . Elizabeth astonishment , however , was extreme , and continually was Elizabeth repeating , “ Why is the housekeeper master so altered ? From what can it proceed ? It can not be for Elizabeth — it can not be for Elizabeth sake that the housekeeper master manners are thus softened . Elizabeth reproofs at Hunsford could not work such a change as this . It is impossible that the housekeeper master should still love Elizabeth . ” 
 
  After walking some time in this way , 
 
  in front , the two gentlemen behind , on resuming 
 
  places , after descending to the brink of the river for the better inspection of some curious water - plant , there chanced to be a little alteration . a little alteration originated in Madeline , who , fatigued by the exercise of the morning , found Elizabeth ’s arm inadequate to Madeline support , and consequently preferred Madeline husband ’s . Fitzwilliam took Madeline place by Fitzwilliam niece , and 
 
  walked on together . After a short silence , Elizabeth first spoke . Elizabeth wished the housekeeper master to know that Elizabeth had been assured of the housekeeper master absence before Elizabeth came to the place , and accordingly began by observing , that the housekeeper master arrival had been very unexpected—“for the housekeeper master housekeeper , ” Elizabeth added , “ informed us that the housekeeper master would certainly not be here till to - morrow ; and indeed , before us left Bakewell , us understood that the housekeeper master were not immediately expected in the country . ” the housekeeper master acknowledged the truth of it all , and said that business with the housekeeper master steward had occasioned the housekeeper master coming forward a few hours before the rest of the party with whom the housekeeper master had been travelling . “ the rest of the party with whom the housekeeper master had been travelling will join the housekeeper master early to - morrow , ” the housekeeper master continued , “ and among the rest of the party with whom the housekeeper master had been travelling are some who will claim an acquaintance with Elizabeth — Charles and Charles sisters . ” 
 
  Elizabeth answered only by a slight bow . Elizabeth thoughts were instantly driven back to the time when Charles ’s name had been the last mentioned between their ; and , if Elizabeth might judge by Fitzwilliam complexion , Fitzwilliam mind was not very differently engaged . 
 
  “ There is also one other person in the party with whom the housekeeper master had been travelling , ” the housekeeper master continued after a pause , “ who more particularly wishes to be known to Elizabeth . Will Elizabeth allow the housekeeper master , or do the housekeeper master ask too much , to introduce Elizabeth to Elizabeth acquaintance during Elizabeth stay at Lambton ? ” 
 
  The surprise of such an application was great indeed ; The surprise of such an application was too great for Elizabeth to know in what manner Elizabeth acceded to such an application . Elizabeth immediately felt that whatever desire Georgiana might have of being acquainted with Elizabeth must be the work of Elizabeth brother , and , without looking farther , it was satisfactory ; it was gratifying to know that Georgiana brother resentment had not made Georgiana brother think really ill of Elizabeth . 
 
  
 
  now walked on in silence , each of 
 
  deep in thought . Elizabeth was not comfortable ; that was impossible ; but Elizabeth was flattered and pleased . the housekeeper master wish of introducing the housekeeper master sister to Elizabeth was a compliment of the highest kind . 
 
  soon outstripped the others , and when 
 
  had reached the carriage , 
 
  were half a quarter of a mile behind . 
 
  the housekeeper master then asked Elizabeth to walk into Pemberley House , situated on the opposite side of a valley , into which the road with some abruptness wound — but Elizabeth declared Elizabeth not tired , and 
 
  stood together on the lawn . At such a time much might have been said , and silence was very awkward . Elizabeth wanted to talk , but there seemed to be an embargo on every subject . At last Elizabeth recollected that Elizabeth had been travelling , and 
 
  talked of Matlock and Dove Dale with great perseverance . Yet time and Elizabeth aunt moved slowly — and Elizabeth patience and Elizabeth ideas were nearly worn out before the tête - à - tête was over . 
 
  On 
 
  coming up they were all pressed to go into Pemberley House , situated on the opposite side of a valley , into which the road with some abruptness wound and take some refreshment ; but this was declined , and they parted on each side with utmost politeness . Fitzwilliam handed 
 
  into the carriage ; and when the carriage drove off , Elizabeth saw the housekeeper master walking slowly towards Pemberley House , situated on the opposite side of a valley , into which the road with some abruptness wound . 
 
  The observations of 
 
  now began ; and each of 
 
  pronounced the housekeeper master to be infinitely superior to anything 
 
  had expected . “ the housekeeper master is perfectly well behaved , polite , and unassuming , ” said Elizabeth uncle . 
 
  “ There is something a little stately in the housekeeper master , to be sure , ” replied Elizabeth aunt , “ but something a little stately is confined to the housekeeper master air , and is not unbecoming . I can now say with the housekeeper , that though some people may call the housekeeper master proud , I have seen nothing of it . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth was never more surprised than by the housekeeper master behaviour to us . the housekeeper master behaviour to us was more than civil ; the housekeeper master behaviour to us was really attentive ; and there was no necessity for such attention . the housekeeper master acquaintance with Elizabeth was very trifling . ” 
 
  “ To be sure , Elizabeth , ” said Elizabeth aunt , “ the housekeeper master is not so handsome as George ; or , rather , the housekeeper master has not George ’s countenance , for the housekeeper master features are perfectly good . But how came Elizabeth to tell Elizabeth aunt that the housekeeper master was so disagreeable ? ” Elizabeth Elizabeth excused Elizabeth as well as Elizabeth could ; said that Elizabeth had liked the housekeeper master better when their had met in Kent than before , and that Elizabeth had never seen the housekeeper master so pleasant as this morning . 
 
  “ But perhaps the housekeeper master may be a little whimsical in the housekeeper master civilities , ” replied Elizabeth uncle . “ Elizabeth great men often are ; and therefore the housekeeper master shall not take the housekeeper master at the housekeeper master word , as the housekeeper master might change the housekeeper master mind another day , and warn the housekeeper master off the housekeeper master grounds . ” 
 
  Elizabeth felt that 
 
  had entirely misunderstood the housekeeper master character , but said nothing . 
 
  “ From what we have seen of the housekeeper master , ” continued Madeline , “ Madeline really should not have thought that the housekeeper master could have behaved in so cruel a way by anybody as the housekeeper master has done by poor George . the housekeeper master has not an ill - natured look . On the contrary , there is something pleasing about the housekeeper master mouth when the housekeeper master speaks . And there is something of dignity in the housekeeper master countenance that would not give one an unfavourable idea of the housekeeper master heart . But , to be sure , the good lady who showed us the housekeeper master house did give the housekeeper master a most flaming character ! Madeline could hardly help laughing aloud sometimes . But the housekeeper master is a liberal master , Madeline suppose , and that in the eye of a servant comprehends every virtue . ” 
 
  Elizabeth here felt Elizabeth called on to say something in vindication of the housekeeper master behaviour to George ; and therefore gave 
 
  to understand , in as guarded a manner as Elizabeth could , that by what Elizabeth had heard from the housekeeper master relations in Kent , the housekeeper master actions were capable of a very different construction ; and that the housekeeper master character was by no means so faulty , nor George ’s so amiable , as they had been considered in Hertfordshire . In confirmation of this , Elizabeth related the particulars of all the pecuniary transactions in which their had been connected , without actually naming Elizabeth authority , but stating Elizabeth authority to be such as might be relied on . 
 
  Madeline was surprised and concerned ; but as their were now approaching the scene of Elizabeth former pleasures , every idea gave way to the charm of recollection ; and Elizabeth was too much engaged in pointing out to the housekeeper master all the interesting spots in the scene of Elizabeth former pleasures environs to think of anything else . Fatigued as Elizabeth had been by the morning ’s walk 
 
  had no sooner dined than Elizabeth set off again in quest of Elizabeth former acquaintance , and the evening was spent in the satisfactions of an intercourse renewed after many years ’ discontinuance . 
 
  The occurrences of the day were too full of interest to leave Elizabeth much attention for any of 
 
  ; and Elizabeth could do nothing but think , and think with wonder , of Fitzwilliam ’s civility , and , above all , of Fitzwilliam wishing Elizabeth to be acquainted with Fitzwilliam sister . 
 Chapter 
 
  Elizabeth had settled it that Fitzwilliam would bring Fitzwilliam sister to visit Elizabeth the very day after Elizabeth reaching Pemberley ; and was consequently resolved not to be out of sight of the inn the whole of that morning . But Elizabeth conclusion was false ; for on the very morning after these visitors arrival at Lambton , these visitors came . these visitors had been walking about the place with some of these visitors new friends , and were just returning to the inn to dress these visitors for dining with the same family , when the sound of a carriage drew these visitors to a window , and these visitors saw these visitors driving up the street . Elizabeth immediately recognizing the livery , guessed what the livery meant , and imparted no small degree of Elizabeth surprise to Elizabeth relations by acquainting Elizabeth relations with the honour which Elizabeth expected . Elizabeth uncle and aunt were all amazement ; and the embarrassment of Elizabeth manner as Elizabeth spoke , joined to the circumstance the circumstance , and many of the circumstances of the preceding day , opened to Elizabeth relations a new idea on the business . Nothing had ever suggested it before , but Elizabeth relations felt that there was no other way of accounting for such attentions from such a quarter than by supposing a partiality for Elizabeth . While these newly - born notions were passing in Elizabeth relations heads , the perturbation of Elizabeth ’s feelings was at every moment increasing . Elizabeth was quite amazed at Elizabeth own discomposure ; but amongst other causes of disquiet , Elizabeth dreaded lest the partiality of Fitzwilliam should have said too much in Elizabeth favour ; and , more than commonly anxious to please , Elizabeth naturally suspected that every power of pleasing would fail Elizabeth . 
 
  Elizabeth retreated from a window , fearful of being seen ; and as Elizabeth walked up and down the room , endeavouring to compose Elizabeth , saw such looks of enquiring surprise in Elizabeth relations as made everything worse . 
 
  Fitzwilliam sister and Fitzwilliam sister brother appeared , and this formidable introduction took place . With astonishment did Elizabeth see that Elizabeth new acquaintance was at least as much embarrassed as Elizabeth . Since Fitzwilliam sister being at Lambton , Elizabeth had heard that Fitzwilliam sister was exceedingly proud ; but the observation of a very few minutes convinced Elizabeth that Fitzwilliam sister was only exceedingly shy . Elizabeth found it difficult to obtain even a word from Fitzwilliam sister beyond a monosyllable . 
 
  Fitzwilliam sister was tall , and on a larger scale than Elizabeth ; and , though little more than sixteen , Fitzwilliam sister figure was formed , and Fitzwilliam sister appearance womanly and graceful . Fitzwilliam sister was less handsome than Fitzwilliam ; but there was sense and good humour in Fitzwilliam sister face , and Fitzwilliam sister manners were perfectly unassuming and gentle . Elizabeth , who had expected to find in Elizabeth as acute and unembarrassed an observer as ever Fitzwilliam had been , was much relieved by discerning such different feelings . 
 
  They had not long been together before Fitzwilliam told Elizabeth that Charles was also coming to wait on Elizabeth ; and Elizabeth had barely time to express Elizabeth satisfaction , and prepare for such a visitor , when Charles ’s quick step was heard on the stairs , and in a moment Charles entered the room . All Elizabeth ’s anger against Charles had been long done away ; but had Elizabeth still felt any , All Elizabeth ’s anger against Charles could hardly have stood All Elizabeth ’s anger against Charles ground against the unaffected cordiality with which Charles expressed Charles on seeing Elizabeth again . Charles enquired in a friendly , though general way , after Elizabeth family , and looked and spoke with the same good - humoured ease that Charles had ever done . 
 
  To Edward and Madeline Charles was scarcely a less interesting personage than to Elizabeth . Edward and Madeline had long wished to see Charles . The whole party before them , indeed , excited a lively attention . The suspicions which had just arisen of Fitzwilliam and Elizabeth directed Fitzwilliam and Elizabeth observation towards each with an earnest though guarded enquiry ; and Fitzwilliam and Elizabeth soon drew from Fitzwilliam and Elizabeth observation the full conviction that one of Fitzwilliam and Elizabeth at least knew what it was to love . Of Elizabeth sensations Elizabeth sensations remained a little in doubt ; but that Charles was overflowing with admiration was evident enough . 
 
  Elizabeth , on Elizabeth side , had much to do . Elizabeth wanted to ascertain the feelings of each of Elizabeth visitors ; Elizabeth wanted to compose Elizabeth own , and to make Elizabeth agreeable to all ; and in the latter object , where Elizabeth feared most to fail , Elizabeth was most sure of success , for those to whom Elizabeth endeavoured to give pleasure were prepossessed in Elizabeth favour . Charles was ready , Fitzwilliam sister was eager , and Fitzwilliam determined , to be pleased . 
 
  In seeing Charles , Elizabeth thoughts naturally flew to Fitzwilliam sister ; and , oh ! how ardently did Elizabeth long to know whether any of Charles were directed in a like manner . Sometimes Elizabeth could fancy that Charles talked less than on former occasions , and once or twice pleased Elizabeth with the notion that , as Charles looked at Elizabeth , Charles was trying to trace a resemblance . But , though this might be imaginary , Elizabeth could not be deceived as to Charles behaviour to Fitzwilliam sister . No look appeared on either side that spoke particular regard . Nothing occurred between them that could justify the hopes of Charles sister . On this point Elizabeth was soon satisfied ; and two or three little circumstances occurred ere them parted , which , in Elizabeth anxious interpretation , denoted a recollection of Jane not untinctured by tenderness , and a wish of saying more that might lead to the mention of Jane , had Charles dared . Charles observed to Elizabeth , at a moment when the others were talking together , and in a tone which had something of real regret , that it “ was a very long time since Charles had had the pleasure of seeing Jane ; ” and , before Elizabeth could reply , Charles added , “ It is above eight months . We have not met since the 26th of November , when we were all dancing together at Netherfield . ” 
 
  Elizabeth was pleased to find Charles memory so exact ; and Charles afterwards took occasion to ask Elizabeth , when unattended to by any of the rest , whether all Elizabeth sisters were at Longbourn . There was not much in the question , nor in the preceding remark ; but there was a look and a manner which gave them meaning . 
 
  It was not often that Elizabeth could turn Elizabeth eyes on Fitzwilliam himself ; but , whenever Elizabeth did catch a glimpse , Elizabeth saw an expression of general complaisance , and in all that Fitzwilliam said Elizabeth heard an accent so removed from hauteur or disdain of Fitzwilliam companions , as convinced Elizabeth that the improvement of manners which Elizabeth had yesterday witnessed however temporary the improvement of manners which Elizabeth had yesterday witnessed however temporary existence might prove , had at least outlived one day . When Elizabeth saw Fitzwilliam thus seeking the acquaintance and courting the good opinion of people with whom any intercourse a few months ago would have been a disgrace — when Elizabeth saw Fitzwilliam thus civil , not only to Elizabeth , but to the very relations whom Fitzwilliam had openly disdained , and recollected their last lively scene in Hunsford Parsonage — the difference , the change was so great , and struck so forcibly on Elizabeth mind , that Elizabeth could hardly restrain Elizabeth astonishment from being visible . Never , even in the company of Fitzwilliam dear friends at Netherfield , or Fitzwilliam dignified relations at Rosings , had Elizabeth seen Fitzwilliam so desirous to please , so free from self - consequence or unbending reserve , as now , when no importance could result from the success of Fitzwilliam endeavours , and when even the acquaintance of those to whom Fitzwilliam attentions were addressed would draw down the ridicule and censure of the ladies both of Netherfield and Rosings . 
 
  Elizabeth visitors stayed with their above half - an - hour ; and when Elizabeth visitors arose to depart , Fitzwilliam called on Fitzwilliam sister to join Fitzwilliam in expressing their wish of seeing Edward and Madeline , and Miss Bennet , to dinner at Pemberley , before Edward and Madeline , and Miss Bennet left the country . Fitzwilliam sister , though with a diffidence which marked Fitzwilliam sister little in the habit of giving invitations , readily obeyed . Madeline looked at Elizabeth , desirous of knowing how Elizabeth , felt disposed as to the invitation acceptance , but Elizabeth had turned away Elizabeth head . Presuming however , that turned spoke rather a momentary embarrassment than any dislike of the invitation , and seeing in Elizabeth husband , who was fond of society , a perfect willingness to accept the invitation , Elizabeth ventured to engage for Elizabeth attendance , and the day after the next was fixed on . 
 
  Charles expressed great pleasure in the certainty of seeing Elizabeth again , having still a great deal to say to Elizabeth , and many enquiries to make after all their Hertfordshire friends . Elizabeth , construing all this into a wish of hearing Charles speak of Charles , was pleased , and on this account , as well as some others , found Elizabeth , when Elizabeth visitors left their , capable of considering the last half - hour with some satisfaction , though while the last half - hour was passing , the enjoyment of the last half - hour had been little . Eager to be alone , and fearful of enquiries or hints from Elizabeth relations , Elizabeth stayed with Elizabeth relations only long enough to hear Elizabeth relations favourable opinion of Charles , and then hurried away to dress . 
 
  But Elizabeth had no reason to fear Edward and Madeline ’s curiosity ; it was not Edward and Madeline wish to force Elizabeth communication . It was evident that Elizabeth was much better acquainted with Fitzwilliam than Edward and Madeline had before any idea of ; it was evident that Fitzwilliam was very much in love with Elizabeth . Edward and Madeline saw much to interest , but nothing to justify enquiry . 
 
  Of Fitzwilliam it was now a matter of anxiety to think well ; and , as far as Edward and Madeline acquaintance reached , there was no fault to find . Edward and Madeline could not be untouched by Fitzwilliam politeness ; and had Edward and Madeline drawn Fitzwilliam character from Edward and Madeline own feelings and Fitzwilliam servant ’s report , without any reference to any other account , the circle in Hertfordshire to which Fitzwilliam was known would not have recognized Fitzwilliam character for Fitzwilliam . There was now an interest , however , in believing Elizabeth ; and Edward and Madeline soon became sensible that the authority of a servant who had known Fitzwilliam since Fitzwilliam was four years old , and whose own manners indicated respectability , was not to be hastily rejected . Neither had anything occurred in the intelligence of Edward and Madeline Lambton friends that could materially lessen its weight . Edward and Madeline had nothing to accuse Fitzwilliam of but pride ; pride Fitzwilliam probably had , and if not , it would certainly be imputed by the inhabitants of a small market - town where the same family did not visit . It was acknowledged , however , that Fitzwilliam was a liberal man , and did much good among the poor . 
 
  With respect to Fitzwilliam sister , Elizabeth visitors soon found that Fitzwilliam sister was not held there in much estimation ; for though the chief of Fitzwilliam sister concerns with the son of Fitzwilliam sister patron were imperfectly understood , it was yet a well - known fact that , on Fitzwilliam sister quitting Hertfordshire , Fitzwilliam sister had left many debts behind Fitzwilliam sister , which Fitzwilliam afterwards discharged . 
 
  As for Elizabeth , Elizabeth thoughts were at Pemberley this evening more than the last ; and the evening , though as this evening passed this evening seemed long , was not long enough to determine Elizabeth feelings towards Fitzwilliam ; and Elizabeth lay awake two whole hours endeavouring to make Elizabeth feelings towards Fitzwilliam out . Elizabeth certainly did not hate Fitzwilliam . No ; hatred had vanished long ago , and Elizabeth had almost as long been ashamed of ever feeling a dislike against Fitzwilliam , that could be so called . The respect created by the conviction of Fitzwilliam valuable qualities , though at first unwillingly admitted , had for some time ceased to be repugnant to Elizabeth feeling ; and The respect created by the conviction of Fitzwilliam valuable qualities was now heightened into somewhat of a friendlier nature , by the testimony so highly in Fitzwilliam favour , and bringing forward Fitzwilliam disposition in so amiable a light , which yesterday had produced . But above all , above respect and esteem , there was a motive within Elizabeth of goodwill which could not be overlooked . a motive within Elizabeth of goodwill which could not be overlooked was gratitude ; gratitude , not merely for having once loved Elizabeth , but for loving Elizabeth still well enough to forgive all the petulance and acrimony of Elizabeth manner in rejecting Fitzwilliam , and all the unjust accusations accompanying Elizabeth rejection . Fitzwilliam Fitzwilliam greatest enemy , seemed , on this accidental meeting , most eager to preserve the acquaintance , and without any indelicate display of regard , or any peculiarity of manner , where their two selves only were concerned , was soliciting the good opinion of Elizabeth friends , and bent on making Elizabeth known to Fitzwilliam sister . Such a change in a man of so much pride exciting not only astonishment but gratitude — for to love , ardent love , Such a change in a man of so much pride exciting not only astonishment but gratitude must be attributed ; and as such Such a change in a man of so much pride exciting not only astonishment but gratitude impression on Elizabeth was of a sort to be encouraged , as by no means unpleasing , though it could not be exactly defined . Elizabeth respected , Elizabeth esteemed , Elizabeth was grateful to Fitzwilliam , Elizabeth felt a real interest in Fitzwilliam welfare ; and Elizabeth only wanted to know how far Elizabeth wished Fitzwilliam welfare to depend upon Elizabeth , and how far it would be for the happiness of both that Elizabeth should employ the power , which Elizabeth fancy told Elizabeth Elizabeth still possessed , of bringing on Elizabeth the renewal of Fitzwilliam addresses . 
 
  It had been settled in the evening between Fitzwilliam sister and Elizabeth , that such a striking civility as Fitzwilliam sister in coming to see Fitzwilliam sister and Elizabeth on the very day of Fitzwilliam sister arrival at Pemberley , for Fitzwilliam sister had reached it only to a late breakfast , ought to be imitated , though it could not be equalled , by some exertion of politeness on Fitzwilliam sister and Elizabeth side ; and , consequently , that it would be highly expedient to wait on Fitzwilliam sister at Pemberley the following morning . They were , therefore , to go . Elizabeth was pleased ; though when Elizabeth asked Elizabeth the reason , Elizabeth had very little to say in reply . 
 
  Edward left their soon after breakfast . The fishing scheme had been renewed the day before , and a positive engagement made of Edward meeting some of the gentlemen at Pemberley before noon . 
 Chapter 
 
  Convinced as Elizabeth now was that Caroline ’s dislike of Elizabeth had originated in jealousy , Elizabeth could not help feeling how unwelcome Elizabeth appearance at Pemberley must be to Elizabeth , and was curious to know with how much civility on Elizabeth side the acquaintance would now be renewed . 
 
  On reaching the house , the whole party were shown through the hall into the saloon , whose northern aspect rendered it delightful for summer . the saloon , whose northern aspect rendered it delightful for summer windows opening to the ground , admitted a most refreshing view of the high woody hills behind the house , and of the beautiful oaks and Spanish chestnuts which were scattered over the intermediate lawn . 
 
  In the house the whole party were received by Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London . Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London reception of the whole party was very civil , but attended with all the embarrassment which , though proceeding from shyness and the fear of doing wrong , would easily give to those who felt those who felt inferior the belief of Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London being proud and reserved . Madeline and Elizabeth , however , did Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London justice , and pitied Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London . 
 
  By Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s the whole party were noticed only by a curtsey ; and , on the whole party being seated , a pause , awkward as such pauses must always be , succeeded for a few moments . a pause , awkward as such pauses must always be was first broken by Mrs. Annesley , a genteel , agreeable - looking woman , whose endeavour to introduce some kind of discourse proved her to be more truly well - bred than either of the others ; and between her and Madeline , with occasional help from Elizabeth , the conversation was carried on . Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London looked as if Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London wished for courage enough to join in the conversation ; and sometimes did venture a short sentence when there was least danger of a short sentence being heard . 
 
  Elizabeth soon saw that Elizabeth was Elizabeth closely watched by Caroline ’s , and that Elizabeth could not speak a word , especially to Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London , without calling Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London attention . This observation would not have prevented Elizabeth from trying to talk to Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London , had they not been seated at an inconvenient distance ; but Elizabeth was not sorry to be spared the necessity of saying much . Elizabeth own thoughts were employing Elizabeth . Elizabeth expected every moment that some of the gentlemen would enter the room . Elizabeth wished , Elizabeth feared that the master of the house might be amongst some of the gentlemen ; and whether Elizabeth wished or feared it most , Elizabeth could scarcely determine . After sitting in this manner a quarter of an hour without hearing Caroline ’s voice , Elizabeth was roused by receiving from Caroline ’s a cold enquiry after the health of Elizabeth family . Elizabeth answered with equal indifference and brevity , and the other said no more . 
 
  The next variation which the whole party visit afforded was produced by the entrance of servants with cold meat , cake , and a variety of all the finest fruits in season ; but the entrance of servants with cold meat , cake , and a variety of all the finest fruits in season did not take place till after many a significant look and smile from Mrs. Annesley to Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London had been given , to remind Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London of Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London post . There was now employment for the whole party — for though the whole party could not all talk , the whole party could all eat ; and the beautiful pyramids of grapes , nectarines , and peaches soon collected the whole party round the table . 
 
  While thus engaged , Elizabeth had a fair opportunity of deciding whether Elizabeth most feared or wished for the appearance of Fitzwilliam , by the feelings which prevailed on Fitzwilliam entering the room ; and then , though but a moment before Elizabeth had believed Elizabeth wishes to predominate , Elizabeth began to regret that Fitzwilliam came . 
 
  Fitzwilliam had been some time with Edward , who , with two or three other gentlemen from the house , was engaged by the river , and had left him only on learning that the ladies of Elizabeth family intended a visit to Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London that morning . No sooner did Fitzwilliam appear than Elizabeth wisely resolved to be perfectly easy and unembarrassed ; a resolution the more necessary to be made , but perhaps not the more easily kept , because Elizabeth saw that the suspicions of the whole party were awakened against the whole party , and that there was scarcely an eye which did not watch Fitzwilliam behaviour when Fitzwilliam first came into the room . In no countenance was attentive curiosity so strongly marked as in Caroline ’s , in spite of the smiles which overspread Caroline ’s face whenever Caroline ’s spoke to one of its objects ; for jealousy had not yet made Caroline ’s desperate , and Caroline ’s attentions to Fitzwilliam were by no means over . Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London , on Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London brother ’s entrance , exerted Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London much more to talk , and Elizabeth saw that Fitzwilliam was anxious for Caroline ’s and Elizabeth to get acquainted , and forwarded as much as possible , every attempt at conversation on either side . Caroline ’s saw all this likewise ; and , in the imprudence of anger , took the first opportunity of saying , with sneering civility : 
 
  “ Pray , Elizabeth , are not the — — shire Militia removed from Meryton ? the — — shire Militia must be a great loss to Elizabeth family . ” 
 
  In Fitzwilliam ’s presence Caroline ’s dared not mention George ’s name ; but Elizabeth instantly comprehended that George ’s was uppermost in Elizabeth thoughts ; and the various recollections connected with George ’s gave Elizabeth a moment ’s distress ; but exerting Elizabeth vigorously to repel the ill - natured attack , Elizabeth presently answered the question in a tolerably detached tone . While Elizabeth spoke , an involuntary glance showed Elizabeth Fitzwilliam , with a heightened complexion , earnestly looking at Elizabeth , and Fitzwilliam sister overcome with confusion , and unable to lift up Caroline ’s eyes . Had Caroline ’s known what pain Caroline ’s was then giving Caroline ’s beloved friend , Caroline ’s undoubtedly would have refrained from the hint ; but Caroline ’s had merely intended to discompose Elizabeth by bringing forward the idea of a man to whom Caroline ’s believed Elizabeth partial , to make Elizabeth betray a sensibility which might injure Elizabeth in Fitzwilliam ’s opinion , and , perhaps , to remind Elizabeth of all the follies and absurdities by which some part of Elizabeth family were connected with that corps . Not a syllable had ever reached Elizabeth of Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London meditated elopement . To no creature had Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London meditated elopement been revealed , where secrecy was possible , except to Elizabeth ; and from all Charles ’s connections Elizabeth brother was particularly anxious to conceal Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London meditated elopement , from the very wish which Elizabeth had long ago attributed to Fitzwilliam , of their becoming hereafter Elizabeth own . Fitzwilliam had certainly formed such a plan , and without meaning that such a plan should affect Fitzwilliam endeavour to separate Fitzwilliam from Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London , it is probable that such a plan might add something to Fitzwilliam lively concern for the welfare of Fitzwilliam friend . 
 
  Elizabeth ’s collected behaviour , however , soon quieted Fitzwilliam emotion ; and as Caroline ’s , vexed and disappointed , dared not approach nearer to George ’s , Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London also recovered in time , though not enough to be able to speak any more . Fitzwilliam scarcely recollected Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London interest in the affair , and the very circumstance which had been designed to turn Fitzwilliam thoughts from Elizabeth seemed to have fixed Fitzwilliam thoughts on Elizabeth more and more cheerfully . 
 
  Their visit did not continue long after the question and answer above mentioned ; and while Fitzwilliam was attending their to their carriage Caroline ’s was venting Caroline ’s feelings in criticisms on Elizabeth ’s person , behaviour , and dress . But Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London would not join Caroline ’s . Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London brother ’s recommendation was enough to ensure Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London favour ; Fitzwilliam judgement could not err . And Fitzwilliam had spoken in such terms of Elizabeth as to leave Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London without the power of finding Elizabeth otherwise than lovely and amiable . When Fitzwilliam returned to the saloon , Caroline ’s could not help repeating to Fitzwilliam some part of what Caroline ’s had been saying to Caroline ’s . 
 
  “ How very ill Elizabeth looks that morning , Fitzwilliam , ” Caroline ’s cried ; “ Caroline ’s never in Caroline ’s life saw anyone so much altered as Elizabeth is since the winter . Elizabeth is grown so brown and coarse ! Louisa and Caroline ’s were agreeing that Louisa and Caroline ’s should not have known Elizabeth again . ” 
 
  However little Fitzwilliam might have liked such an address , Fitzwilliam contented Fitzwilliam with coolly replying that Fitzwilliam perceived no other alteration than Elizabeth being rather tanned , no miraculous consequence of travelling in the summer . 
 
  “ For Caroline ’s own part , ” Caroline ’s rejoined , “ Caroline ’s must confess that Caroline ’s never could see any beauty in Elizabeth . Elizabeth face is too thin ; Elizabeth complexion has no brilliancy ; and Elizabeth features are not at all handsome . Elizabeth nose wants character — there is nothing marked in Elizabeth nose lines . Elizabeth teeth are tolerable , but not out of the common way ; and as for Elizabeth eyes , which have sometimes been called so fine , Caroline ’s could never see anything extraordinary in Elizabeth eyes , which have sometimes been called so fine . Elizabeth eyes , which have sometimes been called so fine have a sharp , shrewish look , which Caroline ’s do not like at all ; and in Elizabeth air altogether there is a self - sufficiency without fashion , which is intolerable . ” 
 
  Persuaded as Caroline ’s was that Fitzwilliam admired Elizabeth , admired was not the best method of recommending Elizabeth ; but angry people are not always wise ; and in seeing Fitzwilliam at last look somewhat nettled , Caroline ’s had all the success Caroline ’s expected . Fitzwilliam was resolutely silent , however , and , from a determination of making Fitzwilliam speak , Caroline ’s continued : 
 
  “ Caroline ’s remember , when we first knew Elizabeth in Hertfordshire , how amazed we all were to find that Elizabeth was a reputed beauty ; and Caroline ’s particularly recollect Fitzwilliam saying one night , after we had been dining at Netherfield , ‘ Elizabeth a beauty!—I should as soon call Caroline ’s a wit . ’ But afterwards Elizabeth seemed to improve on Fitzwilliam , and Caroline ’s believe Fitzwilliam thought Elizabeth rather pretty at one time . ” 
 
  “ Yes , ” replied Fitzwilliam , who could contain Fitzwilliam no longer , “ but that was only when Fitzwilliam first saw Elizabeth , for it is many months since Fitzwilliam have considered Elizabeth as one of the handsomest women of Fitzwilliam acquaintance . ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam then went away , and Caroline ’s was left to all the satisfaction of having forced Fitzwilliam to say what gave no one any pain but Caroline ’s . 
 
  Madeline and Elizabeth talked of all that had occurred during Madeline and Elizabeth visit , as Madeline and Elizabeth returned , except what had particularly interested Madeline and Elizabeth . The look and behaviour of everybody Madeline and Elizabeth had seen were discussed , except of Fitzwilliam . Madeline and Elizabeth talked of Fitzwilliam sister , Fitzwilliam friends , Fitzwilliam house , Fitzwilliam fruit — of everything but Fitzwilliam ; yet Elizabeth was longing to know what Madeline thought of Fitzwilliam , and Madeline would have been highly gratified by Elizabeth beginning the subject . 
 Chapter 
 
  Elizabeth had been a good deal disappointed in not finding a letter from Jane on their first arrival at Lambton ; and this disappointment had been renewed on each of the mornings that had now been spent there ; but on the third Elizabeth repining was over , and Elizabeth sister justified , by the receipt of two letters from Jane at once , on one of which was marked that it had been missent elsewhere . Elizabeth was not surprised at marked , as Jane had written the direction remarkably ill . 
 
  their had just been preparing to walk as two letters from Jane at once came in ; and Elizabeth uncle and aunt , leaving Elizabeth to enjoy two letters from Jane at once in quiet , set off by Elizabeth uncle and aunt . The one missent must first be attended to ; missent had been written five days ago . The beginning contained an account of all their little parties and engagements , with such news as the country afforded ; but the latter half , which was dated a day later , and written in evident agitation , gave more important intelligence . the latter half , which was dated a day later , and written in evident agitation was to this effect : 
 
  “ Since writing the above , dearest Elizabeth , something has occurred of a most unexpected and serious nature ; but I am afraid of alarming Elizabeth — be assured that we are all well . What I have to say relates to poor Lydia . An express came at twelve last night , just as we were all gone to bed , from Colonel Forster , to inform we that poor Lydia was gone off to Scotland with one of Colonel Forster officers ; to own the truth , with George ! Imagine we surprise . To Kitty , however , it does not seem so wholly unexpected . I am very , very sorry . So imprudent a match on both sides ! But I am willing to hope the best , and that George character has been misunderstood . Thoughtless and indiscreet I can easily believe George , but this step ( and let we rejoice over this step ) marks nothing bad at heart . George choice is disinterested at least , for George must know I father can give poor Lydia nothing . Our poor mother is sadly grieved . I father bears it better . How thankful am I that Our never let George and our poor Lydia know what has been said against George ; Our must forget it ourselves . George and our poor Lydia were off Saturday night about twelve , as is conjectured , but were not missed till yesterday morning at eight . An express was sent off directly . I dear Elizabeth , George and our poor Lydia must have passed within ten miles of we . Colonel Forster gives we reason to expect George here soon . poor Lydia left a few lines for George wife , informing George wife of George and our poor Lydia intention . I must conclude , for I can not be long from I poor mother . I am afraid Elizabeth will not be able to make it out , but I hardly know what I have written . ” 
 
  Without allowing Elizabeth time for consideration , and scarcely knowing what Elizabeth felt , Elizabeth on finishing this letter instantly seized the other , and opening the other with the utmost impatience , read as follows : this letter had been written a day later than the conclusion of the first . 
 
  “ By this time , Elizabeth , Elizabeth have received I hurried letter ; I wish this letter may be more intelligible , but though not confined for time , I head is so bewildered that I can not answer for being coherent . Dearest Elizabeth , I hardly know what I would write , but I have bad news for Elizabeth , and bad news can not be delayed . Imprudent as the marriage between George and our poor Lydia would be , we are now anxious to be assured the marriage between George and our poor Lydia has taken place , for there is but too much reason to fear George and our poor Lydia are not gone to Scotland . Colonel Forster came yesterday , having left Brighton the day before , not many hours after An express . Though poor Lydia short letter to George wife gave them to understand that George and our poor Lydia were going to Gretna Green , something was dropped by Denny expressing Denny belief that George never intended to go there , or to marry poor Lydia at all , which was repeated to Colonel Forster . Colonel Forster did trace George and our poor Lydia easily to Clapham , but no further ; for on entering Clapham , George and our poor Lydia removed into a hackney coach , and dismissed the chaise that brought George and our poor Lydia from Epsom . All that is known after this is , that George and our poor Lydia were seen to continue the London road . I know not what to think . After making every possible enquiry on that side London , Colonel Forster came on into Hertfordshire , anxiously renewing them at all the turnpikes , and at the inns in Barnet and Hatfield , but without any success — no such people had been seen to pass through . With the kindest concern Colonel Forster came on to Longbourn , and broke Colonel Forster apprehensions to us in a manner most creditable to Colonel Forster heart . I am sincerely grieved for George and our poor Lydia , but no one can throw any blame on George and our poor Lydia . Our distress , I dear Elizabeth , is very great . I father and mother believe the worst , but I can not think so ill of George . Many circumstances might make it more eligible for George and our poor Lydia to be married privately in town than to pursue George and our poor Lydia first plan ; and even if George could form such a design against a young woman of poor Lydia connections , which is not likely , can I suppose a young woman of poor Lydia connections , which is not likely so lost to everything ? Impossible ! I grieve to find , however , that Colonel Forster is not disposed to depend upon George and our poor Lydia marriage ; Colonel Forster shook Colonel Forster head when I expressed I hopes , and said Colonel Forster feared George was not a man to be trusted . Our poor mother is really ill , and keeps Our poor mother room . Could Our poor mother exert Our poor mother , it would be better ; but exert is not to be expected . And as to I father , I never in I life saw I father so affected . Poor Kitty has anger for having concealed George and our poor Lydia attachment ; but as it was a matter of confidence , one can not wonder . I am truly glad , dearest Elizabeth , that Elizabeth have been spared something of these distressing scenes ; but now , as the first shock is over , shall I own that I long for Elizabeth return ? I am not so selfish , however , as to press for Elizabeth return , if inconvenient . Adieu ! I take up I pen again to do what I have just told Elizabeth I would not ; but circumstances are such that I can not help earnestly begging Elizabeth to come here as soon as possible . I know I dear uncle and aunt so well , that I am not afraid of requesting it , though I have still something more to ask of the former . I father is going to London with Colonel Forster instantly , to try to discover poor Lydia . What I father means to do I am sure I know not ; but I father excessive distress will not allow I father to pursue any measure in the best and safest way , and Colonel Forster is obliged to be at Brighton again to - morrow evening . In such an exigence , I uncle ’s advice and assistance would be everything in the world ; I dear uncle will immediately comprehend what I must feel , and I rely upon I dear uncle goodness . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! where , where is I dear uncle ? ” cried Elizabeth , darting from Elizabeth seat as Elizabeth finished the letter , in eagerness to follow I dear uncle , without losing a moment of the time so precious ; but as Elizabeth reached the door the door was opened by a servant , and Fitzwilliam appeared . Elizabeth pale face and impetuous manner made Fitzwilliam start , and before Fitzwilliam could recover Fitzwilliam to speak , Elizabeth , hastily exclaimed , “ Elizabeth beg Fitzwilliam pardon , but Elizabeth must leave Fitzwilliam . Elizabeth must find Edward this moment , on business that can not be delayed ; Elizabeth have not an instant to lose . ” 
 
  “ Good God ! what is the matter ? ” cried Fitzwilliam , with more feeling than politeness ; then recollecting Fitzwilliam , “ Fitzwilliam will not detain Elizabeth a minute ; but let Fitzwilliam , or let a servant go after George and our poor Lydia . Elizabeth are not well enough ; Elizabeth can not go Elizabeth . ” 
 
  Elizabeth hesitated , but Elizabeth knees trembled under Elizabeth and Elizabeth felt how little would be gained by Elizabeth attempting to pursue George and our poor Lydia . Calling back a servant , therefore , Elizabeth commissioned a servant , though in so breathless an accent as made Elizabeth almost unintelligible , to fetch George and our poor Lydia home instantly . 
 
  On a servant quitting the room Elizabeth sat down , unable to support Elizabeth , and looking so miserably ill , that it was impossible for Fitzwilliam to leave Elizabeth , or to refrain from saying , in a tone of gentleness and commiseration , “ Let Fitzwilliam call Elizabeth maid . Is there nothing Elizabeth could take to give Elizabeth present relief ? A glass of wine ; shall Fitzwilliam get Elizabeth one ? Elizabeth are very ill . ” 
 
  “ No , Elizabeth thank Fitzwilliam , ” Elizabeth replied , endeavouring to recover Elizabeth . “ There is nothing the matter with Elizabeth . Elizabeth am quite well ; Elizabeth am only distressed by some dreadful news which Elizabeth have just received from Longbourn . ” 
 
  Elizabeth burst into tears as Elizabeth alluded to some dreadful news which Elizabeth have just received from Longbourn , and for a few minutes could not speak another word . Fitzwilliam , in wretched suspense , could only say something indistinctly of Fitzwilliam concern , and observe Elizabeth in compassionate silence . At length Elizabeth spoke again . “ Elizabeth have just had a letter from Jane , with such dreadful news . such dreadful news can not be concealed from anyone . poor Lydia has left all poor Lydia friends — has eloped ; has thrown poor Lydia into the power of — of George . They are gone off together from Brighton . Fitzwilliam know George too well to doubt the rest . poor Lydia has no money , no connections , nothing that can tempt George to — poor Lydia is lost for ever . ” Fitzwilliam Fitzwilliam was fixed in astonishment . “ When Elizabeth consider , ” Elizabeth added in a yet more agitated voice , “ that Elizabeth might have prevented it ! I who knew what George was . Had Elizabeth but explained some part of it only — some part of what Elizabeth learnt , to Elizabeth own family ! Had George character been known , this could not have happened . But it is all — all too late now . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam am grieved indeed , ” cried Fitzwilliam ; “ grieved — shocked . But is it certain — absolutely certain ? ” 
 
  “ Oh , yes ! George and our poor Lydia left Brighton together on last night , and were traced almost to London , but not beyond ; George and our poor Lydia are certainly not gone to Scotland . ” 
 
  “ And what has been done , what has been attempted , to recover poor Lydia ? ” 
 
  “ I father is gone to London , and Jane has written to beg I dear uncle immediate assistance ; and we shall be off , Elizabeth hope , in half - an - hour . But nothing can be done — Elizabeth know very well that nothing can be done . How is such a man to be worked on ? How are such a man even to be discovered ? I have not the smallest hope . It is every way horrible ! ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam shook Fitzwilliam head in silent acquiescence . 
 
  “ When Elizabeth eyes were opened to George character — Oh ! had Elizabeth known what Elizabeth ought , what Elizabeth dared to do ! But Elizabeth knew not — Elizabeth was afraid of doing too much . Wretched , wretched mistake ! ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam made no answer . Fitzwilliam seemed scarcely to hear Elizabeth , and was walking up and down the room in earnest meditation , Fitzwilliam brow contracted , Fitzwilliam air gloomy . Elizabeth soon observed , and instantly understood it . Elizabeth power was sinking ; everything must sink under such a proof of family weakness , such an assurance of the deepest disgrace . Elizabeth could neither wonder nor condemn , but the belief of George self - conquest brought nothing consolatory to Elizabeth bosom , afforded no palliation of Elizabeth distress . the belief of George self - conquest was , on the contrary , exactly calculated to make Elizabeth understand Elizabeth own wishes ; and never had Elizabeth so honestly felt that Elizabeth could have loved George , as now , when all love must be vain . 
 
  But self , though self would intrude , could not engross Elizabeth . poor Lydia — the humiliation , the misery Elizabeth was bringing on them all , soon swallowed up every private care ; and covering Elizabeth face with Elizabeth handkerchief , Elizabeth was soon lost to everything else ; and , after a pause of several minutes , was only recalled to a sense of Elizabeth situation by the voice of Elizabeth companion , who , in a manner which , though it spoke compassion , spoke likewise restraint , said , “ I am afraid Elizabeth have been long desiring I absence , nor have I anything to plead in excuse of I stay , but real , though unavailing concern . Would to Heaven that anything could be either said or done on I part that might offer consolation to such distress ! But I will not torment Elizabeth with vain wishes , which may seem purposely to ask for Elizabeth thanks . This unfortunate affair will , I fear , prevent I sister ’s having the pleasure of seeing Elizabeth at Pemberley to - day . ” 
 
  “ Oh , yes . Be so kind as to apologise for us to Georgiana . Say that urgent business calls us home immediately . Conceal the unhappy truth as long as it is possible , Elizabeth know it can not be long . ” 
 
  I readily assured Elizabeth of his secrecy ; again expressed his sorrow for Elizabeth distress , wished it a happier conclusion than there was at present reason to hope , and leaving his compliments for Elizabeth relations , with only one serious , parting look , went away . 
 
  As I quitted the room , Elizabeth felt how improbable it was that George and our poor Lydia should ever see each other again on such terms of cordiality as had marked George and our poor Lydia several meetings in Hertfordshire ; and as Elizabeth threw a retrospective glance over the whole of George and our poor Lydia acquaintance , so full of contradictions and varieties , sighed at the perverseness of those feelings which would now have promoted George and our poor Lydia acquaintance , so full of contradictions and varieties continuance , and would formerly have rejoiced in George and our poor Lydia acquaintance , so full of contradictions and varieties termination . 
 
  If gratitude and esteem are good foundations of affection , Elizabeth ’s change of sentiment will be neither improbable nor faulty . But if otherwise — if regard springing from such sources is unreasonable or unnatural , in comparison of what is so often described as arising on a first interview with its object , and even before two words have been exchanged , nothing can be said in Elizabeth defence , except that Elizabeth had given somewhat of a trial to the latter method in Elizabeth partiality for George , and that the latter method ill success might , perhaps , authorise Elizabeth to seek the other less interesting mode of attachment . Be that as it may , Elizabeth saw George go with regret ; and in this early example of what poor Lydia infamy must produce , found additional anguish as poor Lydia reflected on that wretched business . Never , since reading Jane ’s second letter , had poor Lydia entertained a hope of George ’s meaning to marry poor Lydia . No one but Jane , poor Lydia thought , could flatter Jane with such an expectation . Surprise was the least of poor Lydia feelings on this development . While the contents of the first letter remained in poor Lydia mind , poor Lydia was all surprise — all astonishment that George should marry a girl whom it was impossible George could marry for money ; and how poor Lydia could ever have attached George had appeared incomprehensible . But now it was all too natural . For such an attachment as this Jane might have sufficient charms ; and though Jane did not suppose poor Lydia to be deliberately engaging in an elopement without the intention of marriage , Jane had no difficulty in believing that neither poor Lydia virtue nor poor Lydia understanding would preserve poor Lydia from falling an easy prey . 
 
  Jane had never perceived , while the regiment was in Hertfordshire , that poor Lydia had any partiality for George ; but Jane was convinced that poor Lydia wanted only encouragement to attach poor Lydia to anybody . Sometimes one officer , sometimes another , had been poor Lydia favourite , as their attentions raised their in poor Lydia opinion . poor Lydia affections had continually been fluctuating but never without an object . The mischief of neglect and mistaken indulgence towards such a girl — oh ! how acutely did poor Lydia now feel The mischief of neglect and mistaken indulgence towards such a girl ! 
 
  poor Lydia was wild to be at home — to hear , to see , to be upon the spot to share with Jane in the cares that must now fall wholly upon poor Lydia , in a family so deranged , a father absent , Our poor mother incapable of exertion , and requiring constant attendance ; and though almost persuaded that nothing could be done for poor Lydia , poor Lydia uncle ’s interference seemed of the utmost importance , and till I dear uncle entered the room poor Lydia impatience was severe . George and our poor Lydia had hurried back in alarm , supposing by a servant account that George and our poor Lydia niece was taken suddenly ill ; but satisfying George and our poor Lydia instantly on that head , poor Lydia eagerly communicated the cause of George and our poor Lydia summons , reading two letters from Jane at once aloud , and dwelling on the postscript of the last with trembling energy . — Though poor Lydia had never been a favourite with George and our poor Lydia , George and our poor Lydia could not but be deeply afflicted . Not poor Lydia , but all were concerned in it ; and after the first exclamations of surprise and horror , Edward promised every assistance in Edward power . Elizabeth , though expecting no less , thanked Edward with tears of gratitude ; and George and our poor Lydia being actuated by one spirit , everything relating to George and our poor Lydia journey was speedily settled . George and our poor Lydia were to be off as soon as possible . “ But what is to be done about Pemberley ? ” cried Madeline . “ John told George and our poor Lydia Fitzwilliam was here when Elizabeth sent for George and our poor Lydia ; was it so ? ” 
 
  “ Yes ; and Elizabeth told John George and our poor Lydia should not be able to keep George and our poor Lydia engagement . That is all settled . ” 
 
  “ That is all settled ; ” repeated Elizabeth , as Elizabeth ran into Elizabeth room to prepare . “ And are they upon such terms as for poor Lydia to disclose the real truth ? Oh , that Elizabeth knew how it was ! ” 
 
  But wishes were vain , or at least could only serve to amuse Elizabeth in the hurry and confusion of the following hour . Had Elizabeth been at leisure to be idle , Elizabeth would have remained certain that all employment was impossible to one so wretched as Elizabeth ; but Elizabeth had Elizabeth share of business as well as Elizabeth aunt , and amongst the rest there were notes to be written to all their friends at Lambton , with false excuses for George and our poor Lydia sudden departure . An hour , however , saw the whole completed ; and Edward meanwhile having settled Edward account at the inn , nothing remained to be done but to go ; and Elizabeth , after all the misery of yesterday morning , found Elizabeth , in a shorter space of time than Elizabeth could have supposed , seated in the carriage , and on the road to Longbourn . 
 Chapter 
 
  “ Elizabeth uncle have been thinking it over again , Elizabeth , ” said Elizabeth uncle , as they drove from the town ; “ and really , upon serious consideration , Elizabeth uncle am much more inclined than Elizabeth uncle was to judge as Elizabeth eldest sister does on the matter . It appears to Elizabeth uncle so very unlikely that any young man should form such a design against a girl who is by no means unprotected or friendless , and who was actually staying in any young man colonel ’s family , that Elizabeth uncle am strongly inclined to hope the best . Could any young man expect that Elizabeth eldest sister friends would not step forward ? Could any young man expect to be noticed again by the regiment , after such an affront to Colonel Forster ? any young man temptation is not adequate to the risk ! ” 
 
  “ Do Elizabeth uncle really think so ? ” cried Elizabeth , brightening up for a moment . 
 
  “ Upon Elizabeth uncle word , ” said Elizabeth uncle , “ Elizabeth uncle begin to be of Elizabeth uncle ’s opinion . It is really too great a violation of decency , honour , and interest , for any young man to be guilty of . Elizabeth uncle can not think so very ill of any young man . Can you Elizabeth , Elizabeth , so wholly give any young man up , as to believe any young man capable of it ? ” 
 
  “ Not , perhaps , of neglecting any young man own interest ; but of every other neglect Elizabeth can believe any young man capable . If , indeed , it should be so ! But Elizabeth dare not hope it . Why should the fugitives not go on to Scotland if that had been the case ? ” 
 
  “ In the first place , ” replied Elizabeth uncle , “ there is no absolute proof that the fugitives are not gone to Scotland . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! but the fugitives removing from the chaise into a hackney coach is such a presumption ! And , besides , no traces of the fugitives were to be found on the Barnet road . ” 
 
  “ Well , then — supposing the fugitives to be in London . the fugitives may be there , though for the purpose of concealment , for no more exceptional purpose . It is not likely that money should be very abundant on either side ; and it might strike the fugitives that the fugitives could be more economically , though less expeditiously , married in London than in Scotland . ” 
 
  “ But why all this secrecy ? Why any fear of detection ? Why must the fugitives marriage be private ? Oh , no , no — be is not likely . any young man most particular friend , you see by Jane ’s account , was persuaded of any young man never intending to marry Jane ’s . any young man will never marry a woman without some money . any young man can not afford some money . And what claims has Lydia — what attraction has Lydia beyond youth , health , and good humour that could make any young man , for Lydia sake , forego every chance of benefiting any young man by marrying well ? As to what restraint the apprehensions of disgrace in the corps might throw on a dishonourable elopement with Lydia , Elizabeth uncle am not able to judge ; for Elizabeth uncle know nothing of the effects that such a step might produce . But as to Elizabeth other objection , Elizabeth am afraid Elizabeth other objection will hardly hold good . Lydia has no brothers to step forward ; and any young man might imagine , from Elizabeth father ’s behaviour , from Elizabeth father ’s indolence and the little attention Elizabeth father ’s has ever seemed to give to what was going forward in Elizabeth father ’s family , that Elizabeth father ’s would do as little , and think as little about it , as any father could do , in such a matter . ” 
 
  “ But can Elizabeth think that Lydia is so lost to everything but love of any young man as to consent to live with any young man on any terms other than marriage ? ” 
 
  “ It does seem , and it is most shocking indeed , ” replied Elizabeth , with tears in Elizabeth eyes , “ that a sister ’s sense of decency and virtue in such a point should admit of doubt . But , really , Elizabeth know not what to say . Perhaps Elizabeth am not doing Lydia justice . But Lydia is very young ; Lydia has never been taught to think on serious subjects ; and for the last half - year , nay , for a twelvemonth — Lydia has been given up to nothing but amusement and vanity . Lydia has been allowed to dispose of Lydia time in the most idle and frivolous manner , and to adopt any opinions that came in Lydia way . Since the — — shire were first quartered in Meryton , nothing but love , flirtation , and officers have been in Lydia head . Lydia has been doing everything in Lydia power by thinking and talking on the subject , to give greater — what shall Elizabeth call it ? susceptibility to Lydia feelings ; which are naturally lively enough . And we all know that any young man has every charm of person and address that can captivate a woman . ” 
 
  “ But Elizabeth see that Jane ’s , ” said Elizabeth aunt , “ does not think so very ill of any young man as to believe any young man capable of the attempt . ” 
 
  “ Of whom does Jane ’s ever think ill ? And who is there , whatever might be the fugitives former conduct , that Jane ’s would think capable of such an attempt , till the fugitives former conduct were proved against the fugitives ? But Jane ’s knows , as well as Elizabeth do , what any young man really is . We both know that any young man has been profligate in every sense of the word ; that any young man has neither integrity nor honour ; that any young man is as false and deceitful as any young man is insinuating . ” 
 
  “ And do Elizabeth really know all this ? ” cried Elizabeth uncle . 
 
  “ Elizabeth do indeed , ” replied Elizabeth , colouring . “ Elizabeth told Elizabeth uncle , the other day , of any young man infamous behaviour to Fitzwilliam ; and Elizabeth uncle Elizabeth uncle , when last at Longbourn , heard in what manner any young man spoke of Fitzwilliam Fitzwilliam . And there are other circumstances which Elizabeth am not at liberty — which it is not worth while to relate ; but any young man lies about the whole Pemberley family are endless . From what any young man said of Georgiana Elizabeth was thoroughly prepared to see a proud , reserved , disagreeable girl . Yet any young man knew to the contrary any young man . any young man must know that Georgiana was as amiable and unpretending as we have found Georgiana . ” 
 
  “ But does Lydia know nothing of this ? can Lydia be ignorant of what Elizabeth and Jane ’s seem so well to understand ? ” 
 
  “ Oh , yes!—that , be is the worst of all . Till Elizabeth was in Kent , and saw so much both of Fitzwilliam and Fitzwilliam relation Fitzwilam , Elizabeth was ignorant of the truth Elizabeth . And when Elizabeth returned home , the — — shire was to leave Meryton in a week or fortnight ’s time . As that was the case , neither Jane ’s , nor Elizabeth , thought it necessary to make Elizabeth and Jane ’s knowledge public ; for of what use could it apparently be to any one , that the good opinion which all the neighbourhood had of any young man should then be overthrown ? And even when it was settled that Lydia should go with Colonel Forster , the necessity of opening Lydia eyes to any young man character never occurred to Elizabeth . That Lydia could be in any danger from the deception never entered Elizabeth head . That such a consequence as this could ensue , Elizabeth uncle may easily believe , was far enough from Elizabeth thoughts . ” 
 
  “ When they all removed to Brighton , therefore , Elizabeth had no reason , Elizabeth uncle suppose , to believe they all fond of each other ? ” 
 
  “ Not the slightest . Elizabeth can remember no symptom of affection on either side ; and had anything of the kind been perceptible , Elizabeth uncle must be aware that ours is not a family on which anything of the kind could be thrown away . When first any young man entered the corps , Elizabeth eldest sister was ready enough to admire any young man ; but so we all were . Every girl in or near any young man was out of Every girl in or near any young man senses about any young man for the first two months ; but any young man never distinguished Every girl in or near any young man by any particular attention ; and , consequently , after a moderate period of extravagant and wild admiration , Every girl in or near any young man fancy for any young man gave way , and others of the regiment , who treated Every girl in or near any young man with more distinction , again became Every girl in or near any young man favourites . ” 
 
  It may be easily believed , that however little of novelty could be added to the fugitives fears , hopes , and conjectures , on the subject , by its repeated discussion , no other could detain the fugitives from the subject long , during the whole of the journey . From Elizabeth ’s thoughts it was never absent . Fixed there by the keenest of all anguish , self - reproach , Elizabeth could find no interval of ease or forgetfulness . 
 
  They travelled as expeditiously as possible , and , sleeping one night on the road , reached Longbourn by dinner time the next day . It was a comfort to Elizabeth to consider that Jane ’s could not have been wearied by long expectations . 
 
  The little Gardiners , attracted by the sight of a chaise , were standing on the steps of the house as The little Gardiners entered the paddock ; and , when the carriage drove up to the door , the joyful surprise that lighted up The little Gardiners faces , and displayed itself over The little Gardiners whole bodies , in a variety of capers and frisks , was the first pleasing earnest of The little Gardiners welcome . 
 
  Elizabeth jumped out ; and , after giving each of The little Gardiners a hasty kiss , hurried into the vestibule , where Jane ’s Jane ’s mother ’s apartment , immediately met Elizabeth . 
 
  Elizabeth , as Elizabeth affectionately embraced Jane ’s , whilst tears filled the eyes of Elizabeth and Jane ’s , lost not a moment in asking whether anything had been heard of the fugitives . 
 
  “ Not yet , ” replied Jane ’s . “ But now that Jane ’s dear uncle is come , Jane ’s hope everything will be well . ” 
 
  “ Is Elizabeth father ’s in town ? ” 
 
  “ Yes , Elizabeth father ’s went on Tuesday , as Elizabeth uncle wrote Elizabeth uncle word . ” 
 
  “ And have Elizabeth heard from Elizabeth father ’s often ? ” 
 
  “ We have heard only twice . Elizabeth father ’s wrote Elizabeth a few lines on Wednesday to say that Elizabeth father ’s had arrived in safety , and to give Elizabeth Elizabeth father ’s directions , which Elizabeth particularly begged Elizabeth father ’s to do . Elizabeth father ’s merely added that Elizabeth father ’s should not write again till Elizabeth father ’s had something of importance to mention . ” 
 
  “ And Jane ’s mother — how is Elizabeth eldest sister ? How are Elizabeth all ? ” 
 
  “ Jane ’s mother is tolerably well , Elizabeth uncle trust ; though Elizabeth eldest sister spirits are greatly shaken . Elizabeth eldest sister is up stairs and will have great satisfaction in seeing the others . Elizabeth eldest sister does not yet leave Elizabeth eldest sister dressing - room . Mary and Kitty , thank Heaven , are quite well . ” 
 
  “ But Jane ’s — how are Jane ’s ? ” cried Elizabeth . “ Jane ’s look pale . How much Jane ’s must have gone through ! ” Elizabeth eldest sister Elizabeth sister , however , assured Elizabeth of Elizabeth eldest sister being perfectly well ; and their conversation , which had been passing while Elizabeth uncle and Elizabeth uncle were engaged with Elizabeth uncle and Elizabeth uncle children , was now put an end to by the approach of the whole party . Jane ’s ran to Jane ’s uncle and aunt , and welcomed and thanked Jane ’s uncle and aunt , with alternate smiles and tears . 
 
  When the whole party were all in the drawing - room , the questions which Elizabeth had already asked were of course repeated by the others , and the others soon found that Jane ’s had no intelligence to give . The sanguine hope of good , however , which the benevolence of Jane ’s heart suggested had not yet deserted Jane ’s ; Jane ’s still expected that it would all end well , and that every morning would bring some letter , either from Lydia or Elizabeth father ’s , to explain their proceedings , and , perhaps , announce their marriage . 
 
  Mother , to whose apartment the whole party repaired , after a few minutes ’ conversation together , received the whole party exactly as might be expected ; with tears and lamentations of regret , invectives against the villainous conduct of any young man , and complaints of Mother , to whose apartment the whole party repaired , after a few minutes ’ conversation together , own sufferings and ill - usage ; blaming everybody but any young man . 
 
  “ If Elizabeth had been able , ” said Elizabeth , “ to carry Elizabeth point in going to Brighton , with all Elizabeth family , this would not have happened ; but poor dear Lydia had nobody to take care of Lydia . Why did the Forsters ever let Lydia go out of the Forsters sight ? Elizabeth uncle am sure there was some great neglect or other on the Forsters side , for Lydia is not the kind of girl to do such a thing if Lydia had been well looked after . Elizabeth always thought the Forsters were very unfit to have the charge of Lydia ; but Elizabeth was overruled , as Elizabeth always am . Lydia ! And now here ’s Elizabeth father ’s gone away , and Elizabeth know any young man will fight any young man , wherever any young man meets any young man and then any young man will be killed , and what is to become of us all ? The Collinses will turn Elizabeth and Jane ’s out before any young man is cold in any young man grave , and if Elizabeth uncle are not kind to Elizabeth and Jane ’s , Elizabeth uncle , Elizabeth do not know what Elizabeth and Jane ’s shall do . ” 
 
  the whole party exclaimed against such terrific ideas ; and Elizabeth uncle , after general assurances of Elizabeth uncle affection for Lydia and all Lydia family , told Lydia that Elizabeth uncle meant to be in London the very next day , and would assist Elizabeth father ’s in every endeavour for recovering Lydia . 
 
  “ Do not give way to useless alarm , ” added Elizabeth uncle ; “ though it is right to be prepared for the worst , there is no occasion to look on it as certain . It is not quite a week since the fugitives left Brighton . In a few days more we may gain some news of the fugitives ; and till we know that the fugitives are not married , and have no design of marrying , do not let we give the matter over as lost . As soon as Elizabeth uncle get to town Elizabeth uncle shall go to any young man , and make any young man come home with Elizabeth uncle to Gracechurch Street ; and then we may consult together as to what is to be done . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! Elizabeth uncle , ” replied Lydia , “ that is exactly what Lydia could most wish for . And now do , when Elizabeth uncle get to town , find the fugitives out , wherever the fugitives may be ; and if the fugitives are not married already , make the fugitives marry . And as for wedding clothes , do not let the fugitives wait for wedding clothes , but tell Lydia Lydia shall have as much money as Lydia chooses to buy wedding clothes , after the fugitives are married . And , above all , keep Elizabeth father ’s from fighting . Tell Elizabeth father ’s what a dreadful state Elizabeth am in , that Elizabeth am frighted out of Elizabeth wits — and have such tremblings , such flutterings , all over Elizabeth — such spasms in Elizabeth side and pains in Elizabeth head , and such beatings at heart , that Elizabeth can get no rest by night nor by day . And tell Elizabeth dear Lydia not to give any directions about Lydia clothes till Lydia has seen Elizabeth uncle , for Lydia does not know which are the best warehouses . Oh , Elizabeth uncle , how kind Elizabeth uncle are ! Elizabeth know Elizabeth uncle will contrive it all . ” 
 
  But Elizabeth uncle , though Elizabeth uncle assured Lydia again of Elizabeth uncle earnest endeavours in the cause , could not avoid recommending moderation to Lydia , as well in Lydia hopes as Lydia fear ; and after talking with Lydia in this manner till dinner was on the table , the whole party left Lydia to vent all Lydia feelings on the housekeeper , who attended in the absence of the housekeeper , who attended in the absence of daughters . 
 
  Though Lydia brother and sister were persuaded that there was no real occasion for such a seclusion from any young man colonel ’s family , Lydia brother and sister did not attempt to oppose such a seclusion , for Lydia brother and sister knew that Lydia had not prudence enough to hold Lydia tongue before the servants , while Lydia brother and sister waited at table , and judged it better that one only of any young man colonel ’s family , and the one whom Lydia brother and sister could most trust should comprehend all Lydia fears and solicitude on the subject . 
 
  In the dining - room they were soon joined by Mary and Kitty , who had been too busily engaged in Mary and Kitty , who had been too busily engaged in separate apartments to make Mary and Kitty , who had been too busily engaged in appearance before . One came from One books , and the other from Kitty toilette . The faces of Mary and Kitty , who had been too busily engaged in , however , were tolerably calm ; and no change was visible in either , except that the loss of Elizabeth eldest sister , or the anger which Kitty had Kitty incurred in this business , had given more of fretfulness than usual to the accents of Kitty . As for Mary , Mary was mistress enough of Mary to whisper to Elizabeth , with a countenance of grave reflection , soon after they were seated at table : 
 
  “ This is a most unfortunate affair , and will probably be much talked of . But we must stem the tide of malice , and pour into the wounded bosoms of each other the balm of sisterly consolation . ” 
 
  Then , perceiving in Elizabeth no inclination of replying , Mary added , “ Unhappy as the event must be for Lydia , we may draw from the event this useful lesson : that loss of virtue in a female is irretrievable ; that one false step involves a female in endless ruin ; that a female reputation is no less brittle than a female reputation is beautiful ; and that a female can not be too much guarded in a female behaviour towards the undeserving of the other sex . ” 
 
  Elizabeth lifted up Elizabeth eyes in amazement , but was too much oppressed to make any reply . Mary , however , continued to console Mary with such kind of moral extractions from the evil before them . 
 
  In the afternoon , Elizabeth uncle and Elizabeth uncle were able to be for half - an - hour by Elizabeth uncle and Elizabeth uncle ; and Elizabeth instantly availed Elizabeth of the opportunity of making many enquiries , which Jane ’s was equally eager to satisfy . After joining in general lamentations over the dreadful sequel of this event , which Elizabeth considered as all but certain , and Miss Bennet could not assert to be wholly impossible , Jane ’s continued the subject , by saying , “ But tell Elizabeth uncle all and everything about this event which Elizabeth uncle have not already heard . Give Elizabeth uncle further particulars . What did Colonel Forster say ? Had the fugitives no apprehension of anything before the fugitives marriage took place ? the fugitives must have seen the fugitives together for ever . ” 
 
  “ Colonel Forster did own that Colonel Forster had often suspected some partiality , especially on Lydia ’s side , but nothing to give Colonel Forster any alarm . Elizabeth am so grieved for Colonel Forster ! Colonel Forster behaviour was attentive and kind to the utmost . Colonel Forster was coming to us , in order to assure us of Colonel Forster concern , before Colonel Forster had any idea of the fugitives not being gone to Scotland : when any idea of the fugitives not being gone to Scotland first got abroad , any idea of the fugitives not being gone to Scotland hastened Colonel Forster journey . ” 
 
  “ And was Denny convinced that any young man would not marry ? Did Denny know of the fugitives intending to go off ? Had Colonel Forster seen Denny Denny ? ” 
 
  “ Yes ; but , when questioned by Denny , Denny denied knowing anything of the fugitives plans , and would not give Denny real opinion about the fugitives plans . Denny did not repeat Denny persuasion of the fugitives not marrying — and from that , Elizabeth am inclined to hope , Denny might have been misunderstood before . ” 
 
  “ And till Colonel Forster came Colonel Forster , not one of the others entertained a doubt , Elizabeth uncle suppose , of the fugitives being really married ? ” 
 
  “ How was it possible that such an idea should enter Elizabeth and Jane ’s brains ? Elizabeth felt a little uneasy — a little fearful of Lydia happiness with any young man in marriage , because Elizabeth knew that any young man conduct had not been always quite right . Elizabeth father and mother knew nothing of knew ; Elizabeth father and mother only felt how imprudent a match it must be . Elizabeth then owned , with a very natural triumph on knowing more than the rest of Elizabeth and Jane ’s , that in Lydia ’s last letter Lydia had prepared Lydia for such a step . Lydia had known , it seems , of the fugitives being in love with each other , many weeks . ” 
 
  “ But not before the fugitives went to Brighton ? ” 
 
  “ No , Elizabeth believe not . ” 
 
  “ And did Colonel Forster appear to think well of any young man any young man ? Does Colonel Forster know any young man real character ? ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth must confess that Colonel Forster did not speak so well of any young man as Colonel Forster formerly did . Colonel Forster believed any young man to be imprudent and extravagant . And since this sad affair has taken place , it is said that any young man left Meryton greatly in debt ; but Elizabeth hope left may be false . ” 
 
  “ Oh , Jane ’s , had we been less secret , had we told what we knew of any young man , this could not have happened ! ” 
 
  “ Perhaps it would have been better , ” replied Jane ’s . “ But to expose the former faults of any person without knowing what any person present feelings were , seemed unjustifiable . We acted with the best intentions . ” 
 
  “ Could Colonel Forster repeat the particulars of Lydia ’s note to Elizabeth eldest sister ? ” 
 
  “ Colonel Forster brought Lydia ’s note to Elizabeth eldest sister with Colonel Forster for us to see . ” 
 
  Jane ’s then took Lydia ’s note to Elizabeth eldest sister from Jane ’s pocket - book , and gave Lydia ’s note to Elizabeth eldest sister to Elizabeth . These were the contents : 
 
  “ Lydia dear Harriet , 
  “ Lydia dear Harriet will laugh when Lydia dear Harriet know where Lydia am gone , and Lydia can not help laughing Lydia at Lydia dear Harriet surprise to - morrow morning , as soon as Lydia am missed . Lydia am going to Gretna Green , and if Lydia dear Harriet can not guess with who , Lydia shall think Lydia dear Harriet a simpleton , for there is but one man in the world Lydia love , and but one man in the world Lydia love is an angel . Lydia should never be happy without but one man in the world Lydia love , so think it no harm to be off . Lydia dear Harriet need not send them word at Longbourn of Lydia going , if Lydia dear Harriet do not like word at Longbourn of Lydia going , for it will make the surprise the greater , when Lydia write to them and sign Lydia name ‘ Lydia . ’ What a good joke it will be ! Lydia can hardly write for laughing . Pray make Lydia excuses to Pratt for not keeping Lydia engagement , and dancing with Pratt to - night . Tell Pratt Lydia hope Pratt will excuse Lydia when Pratt knows all ; and tell Pratt Lydia will dance with Pratt at the next ball we meet , with great pleasure . Lydia shall send for Lydia clothes when Lydia get to Longbourn ; but Lydia wish Lydia dear Harriet would tell Sally to mend a great slit in Lydia worked muslin gown before Lydia clothes are packed up . Good - bye . Give Lydia love to Colonel Forster . Lydia hope Elizabeth uncle will drink to they good journey . 
 
  “ Elizabeth affectionate friend , 
  “ LYDIA BENNET . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! thoughtless , thoughtless Lydia ! ” cried Elizabeth when Elizabeth had finished Lydia ’s note to Elizabeth eldest sister . “ What a letter is Lydia ’s note to Elizabeth eldest sister , to be written at such a moment ! But at least Lydia ’s note to Elizabeth eldest sister shows that Lydia was serious on the subject of the fugitives journey . Whatever Colonel Forster might afterwards persuade Lydia to , it was not on Lydia side a scheme of infamy . Elizabeth poor father ! how Elizabeth father ’s must have felt it ! ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth never saw anyone so shocked . Elizabeth father ’s could not speak a word for full ten minutes . Jane ’s mother was taken ill immediately , and the whole house in such confusion ! ” 
 
  “ Oh ! Jane ’s , ” cried Elizabeth , “ was there a servant belonging to it who did not know the whole story before the end of the day ? ” 
 
  “ Jane ’s do not know . Jane ’s hope there was . But to be guarded at such a time is very difficult . Elizabeth eldest sister was in hysterics , and though Jane ’s endeavoured to give Elizabeth eldest sister every assistance in Jane ’s power , Jane ’s am afraid Jane ’s did not do so much as Jane ’s might have done ! But the horror of what might possibly happen almost took from Jane ’s Jane ’s faculties . ” 
 
  “ Jane ’s attendance upon Elizabeth eldest sister has been too much for Jane ’s . Jane ’s do not look well . Oh that Elizabeth uncle had been with Jane ’s ! Jane ’s have had every care and anxiety upon Jane ’s alone . ” 
 
  “ Mary and Kitty have been very kind , and would have shared in every fatigue , Jane ’s am sure ; but Jane ’s did not think it right for either of Mary and Kitty . Kitty is slight and delicate ; and Mary studies so much , that Mary hours of repose should not be broken in on . Jane ’s aunt Phillips came to Longbourn on Tuesday , after Jane ’s father went away ; and was so good as to stay till Thursday with Jane ’s . Jane ’s aunt Phillips was of great use and comfort to us all . And Lady Lucas has been very kind ; Lady Lucas walked here on Wednesday morning to condole with us , and offered Lady Lucas services , or any of Lady Lucas daughters ’ , if any of Lady Lucas daughters ’ should be of use to us . ” 
 
  “ Lady Lucas had better have stayed at home , ” cried Elizabeth ; “ perhaps Lady Lucas meant well , but , under such a misfortune as this , one can not see too little of one ’s neighbours . Assistance is impossible ; condolence insufferable . Let them triumph over us at a distance , and be satisfied . ” 
 
  Elizabeth eldest sister then proceeded to enquire into the measures which Elizabeth father ’s had intended to pursue , while in town , for the recovery of Elizabeth eldest sister . 
 
  “ Elizabeth father ’s meant Jane ’s believe , ” replied Jane ’s , “ to go to Epsom , the place where the fugitives last changed horses , see the postilions and try if anything could be made out from the postilions . Elizabeth father ’s principal object must be to discover the number of the hackney coach which took the fugitives from Clapham . the hackney coach which took the fugitives from Clapham had come with a fare from London ; and as Elizabeth father ’s thought that the circumstance of a gentleman and lady ’s removing from one carriage into another might be remarked Elizabeth father ’s meant to make enquiries at Clapham . If Elizabeth father ’s could anyhow discover at what house the coachman had before set down the coachman fare , Elizabeth father ’s determined to make enquiries there , and hoped it might not be impossible to find out the stand and number of the hackney coach which took the fugitives from Clapham . Jane ’s do not know of any other designs that Elizabeth father ’s had formed ; but Elizabeth father ’s was in such a hurry to be gone , and Elizabeth father ’s spirits so greatly discomposed , that Jane ’s had difficulty in finding out even so much as this . ” 
 Chapter 
 
  The whole party were in hopes of a letter from Father the next morning , but the post came in without bringing a single line from Father . Father family knew Father to be , on all common occasions , a most negligent and dilatory correspondent ; but at such a time Father family had hoped for exertion . Father family were forced to conclude that Father had no pleasing intelligence to send ; but even of had Father family would have been glad to be certain . Father had waited only for the letters before Father set off . 
 
  When Father was gone , Father family were certain at least of receiving constant information of what was going on , and Father family uncle promised , at parting , to prevail on Father to return to Longbourn , as soon as Father could , to the great consolation of Father sister , who considered it as the only security for Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s not being killed in a duel . 
 
  Madeline and the children were to remain in Hertfordshire a few days longer , as the former thought the former presence might be serviceable to the children . the former shared in the children attendance on Father , and was a great comfort to the children in the children hours of freedom . the children other aunt also visited the children frequently , and always , as the children other aunt said , with the design of cheering and heartening the children up — though , as the children other aunt never came without reporting some fresh instance of Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s extravagance or irregularity , the children other aunt seldom went away without leaving the children more dispirited than the children other aunt found the children . 
 
  All Meryton seemed striving to blacken Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s . Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s was declared to be in debt to every tradesman in the place , and Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s intrigues , all honoured with the title of seduction , had been extended into every tradesman ’s family . Everybody declared that Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s was the wickedest young man in the world ; and everybody began to find out that everybody had always distrusted the appearance of Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s goodness . Elizabeth , though Elizabeth did not credit above half of what was said , believed enough to make Elizabeth former assurance of Elizabeth ruin more certain ; and even Jane , who believed still less of Elizabeth ruin , became almost hopeless , more especially as the time was now come when , if yourself and Mother had gone to Scotland , which even Jane , who believed still less of Elizabeth ruin had never before entirely despaired of , yourself and Mother must in all probability have gained some news of yourself and Mother . 
 
  Father left Longbourn on Sunday ; on Tuesday Father wife received a letter from Father ; it told yourself and Mother that , on Father arrival , Father had immediately found out Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s , and persuaded Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s to come to Gracechurch Street ; that Father had been to Epsom and Clapham , before Father arrival , but without gaining any satisfactory information ; and that Father was now determined to enquire at all the principal hotels in town , as Father thought it possible yourself and Mother might have gone to one of all the principal hotels in town , on yourself and Mother first coming to London , before yourself and Mother procured lodgings . Father did not expect any success from enquire , but as Father brother was eager in enquire , Father meant to assist Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s in pursuing enquire . Father added that Father seemed wholly disinclined at present to leave London and promised to write again very soon . There was also a postscript to this effect : 
 
  “ Father have written to Colonel Forster to desire Colonel Forster to find out , if possible , from some of Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s intimates in the regiment , whether Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s has any relations or connections who would be likely to know in what part of town Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s has now concealed Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s . If there were anyone that one could apply to with a probability of gaining such a clue as that , anyone that one could apply to with a probability of gaining such a clue as that might be of essential consequence . At present we have nothing to guide we . Colonel Forster will , Father dare say , do everything in Colonel Forster power to satisfy we on this head . But , on second thoughts , perhaps , Elizabeth could tell we what relations Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s has now living , better than any other person . ” 
 
  Elizabeth was at no loss to understand from whence this deference to Elizabeth authority proceeded ; but it was not in Elizabeth power to give any information of so satisfactory a nature as the compliment deserved . Elizabeth had never heard of Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s having had any relations , except a father and mother , both of whom had been dead many years . It was possible , however , that some of Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s companions in the — — shire might be able to give more information ; and though Elizabeth was not very sanguine in expecting it , the application was a something to look forward to . 
 
  Every day at Longbourn was now a day of anxiety ; but the most anxious part of each was when the post was expected . The arrival of letters was the grand object of every morning ’s impatience . Through letters , whatever of good or bad was to be told would be communicated , and every succeeding day was expected to bring some news of importance . 
 
  But before yourself and Mother heard again from Father , a letter arrived for yourself and Mother father , from a different quarter , from William Collins ; which , as even Jane , who believed still less of Elizabeth ruin had received directions to open all that came for even Jane , who believed still less of Elizabeth ruin in even Jane , who believed still less of Elizabeth ruin absence , even Jane , who believed still less of Elizabeth ruin accordingly read ; and Elizabeth , who knew what curiosities even Jane , who believed still less of Elizabeth ruin letters always were , looked over even Jane , who believed still less of Elizabeth ruin , and read a letter likewise . a letter was as follows : 
 
  “ Father , 
  “ Father feel Father called upon , by our relationship , and Father situation in life , to condole with Father on the grievous affliction Father are now suffering under , of which we were yesterday informed by a letter from Hertfordshire . Be assured , Father , that William Collins and Father sincerely sympathise with Father and all Father respectable family , in Father present distress , which must be of the bitterest kind , because proceeding from a cause which no time can remove . No arguments shall be wanting on Father part that can alleviate so severe a misfortune — or that may comfort Father , under a circumstance that must be of all others the most afflicting to a parent ’s mind . The death of Father daughter would have been a blessing in comparison of this . And it is the more to be lamented , because there is reason to suppose as Father dear Charlotte informs Father , that this licentiousness of behaviour in Father daughter has proceeded from a faulty degree of indulgence ; though , at the same time , for the consolation of yourself and Mother , Father am inclined to think that Father daughter own disposition must be naturally bad , or Father daughter could not be guilty of such an enormity , at so early an age . Howsoever that may be , Father are grievously to be pitied ; in which opinion Father am not only joined by William Collins , but likewise by Cathleen and Cathleen daughter , to whom Father have related the affair . Cathleen and Cathleen daughter , to whom Father have related the affair agree with Father in apprehending that this false step in one daughter will be injurious to the fortunes of all the others ; for who , as Cathleen Cathleen condescendingly says , will connect themselves with such a family ? And this consideration leads Father moreover to reflect , with augmented satisfaction , on a certain event of last November ; for had a certain event of last November been otherwise , Father must have been involved in all Father sorrow and disgrace . Let Father then advise Father , Father , to console Father as much as possible , to throw off Father unworthy child from Father affection for ever , and leave Father daughter to reap the fruits of Father daughter own heinous offense . 
 
  “ Father am , Father , etc . , etc . ” 
 
  Father did not write again till Father had received an answer from Colonel Forster ; and then Father had nothing of a pleasant nature to send . It was not known that Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s had a single relationship with whom Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s kept up any connection , and it was certain that Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s had no near one living . Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s former acquaintances had been numerous ; but since Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s had been in the regiment , it did not appear that Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s was on terms of particular friendship with any of Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s former acquaintances . There was no one , therefore , who could be pointed out as likely to give any news of Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s . And in the wretched state of Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s own finances , there was a very powerful motive for secrecy , in addition to Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s fear of discovery by Father daughter relations , for it had just transpired that Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s had left gaming debts behind Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s to a very considerable amount . Colonel Forster believed that more than a thousand pounds would be necessary to clear Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s expenses at Brighton . Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s owed a good deal in town , but Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s debts of honour were still more formidable . Father did not attempt to conceal these particulars from the Longbourn family . even Jane , who believed still less of Elizabeth ruin heard these particulars with horror . “ A gamester ! ” even Jane , who believed still less of Elizabeth ruin cried . “ This is wholly unexpected . even Jane , who believed still less of Elizabeth ruin had not an idea of This . ” 
 
  Father added in Father letter , that the children might expect to see Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s at home on the following day , which was Saturday . Rendered spiritless by the ill - success of all their endeavours , Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s had yielded to Colonel Forster entreaty that Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s would return to Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s family , and leave it to Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s to do whatever occasion might suggest to be advisable for continuing yourself and Mother pursuit . When Father was told of this , Father did not express so much satisfaction as the children expected , considering what Father anxiety for Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s life had been before . 
 
  “ What , is Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s coming home , and without Father daughter ? ” Father cried . “ Sure Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s will not leave London before Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s has found yourself and Mother . Who is to fight Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s , and make Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s marry Father daughter , if Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s comes away ? ” 
 
  As Madeline began to wish to be at home , it was settled that Madeline and the children should go to London , at the same time Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s came from The coach . The coach , therefore , took Madeline and the children the first stage of Madeline and the children journey , and brought The coach master back to Longbourn . 
 
  Madeline went away in all the perplexity about Elizabeth and Elizabeth Derbyshire friend that had attended Elizabeth from that part of the world . Elizabeth Derbyshire friend that had attended Elizabeth from that part of the world name had never been voluntarily mentioned before Madeline and the children by Father daughter ; and the kind of half - expectation which Madeline had formed , of Madeline and the children being followed by a letter from Elizabeth Derbyshire friend that had attended Elizabeth from that part of the world , had ended in nothing . Elizabeth had received none since Elizabeth return that could come from Pemberley . 
 
  The present unhappy state of Longbourn rendered any other excuse for the lowness of Elizabeth spirits unnecessary ; nothing , therefore , could be fairly conjectured from that , though Elizabeth , who was by this time tolerably well acquainted with Elizabeth own feelings , was perfectly aware that , had Elizabeth known nothing of Elizabeth Derbyshire friend that had attended Elizabeth from that part of the world , Elizabeth could have borne the dread of Father daughter infamy somewhat better . It would have spared Elizabeth , Elizabeth thought , one sleepless night out of two . 
 
  When Father arrived , Father had all the appearance of Father usual philosophic composure . Father said as little as Father had ever been in the habit of saying ; made no mention of the business that had taken Father away , and it was some time before the children had courage to speak of the business that had taken Father away . 
 
  It was not till the afternoon , when Father had joined the children at tea , that Elizabeth ventured to introduce the subject ; and then , on Elizabeth briefly expressing Elizabeth sorrow for what Father must have endured , Father replied , “ Say nothing of that . Who should suffer but Father ? It has been Father own doing , and Father ought to feel it . ” 
 
  “ Father must not be too severe upon Father , ” replied Elizabeth . 
 
  “ Elizabeth may well warn Elizabeth against such an evil . Human nature is so prone to fall into such an evil ! No , Elizabeth , let Father once in Father life feel how much Father have been to blame . Father am not afraid of being overpowered by the impression . the impression will pass away soon enough . ” 
 
  “ Do Elizabeth suppose yourself and Mother to be in London ? ” 
 
  “ Yes ; where else can yourself and Mother be so well concealed ? ” 
 
  “ And Father daughter used to want to go to London , ” added Kitty . 
 
  “ Father daughter is happy then , ” said Father daughter father drily ; “ and Father daughter residence there will probably be of some duration . ” 
 
  Then after a short silence Father continued : 
 
  “ Elizabeth , Father bear Father no ill - will for being justified in Father advice to Father daughter last May , which , considering the event , shows some greatness of mind . ” 
 
  yourself and Mother were interrupted by Miss Bennet , who came to fetch Father tea . 
 
  “ This is a parade , ” Father cried , “ which does one good ; This gives such an elegance to misfortune ! Another day Father will do the same ; Father will sit in Father library , in Father nightcap and powdering gown , and give as much trouble as Father can ; or , perhaps , Father may defer it till Elizabeth runs away . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth am not going to run away , Father , ” said Elizabeth fretfully . “ If Elizabeth should ever go to Brighton , Elizabeth would behave better than Father daughter . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth go to Brighton . Father would not trust Elizabeth so near Brighton as Eastbourne for fifty pounds ! No , Elizabeth , Father have at last learnt to be cautious , and Elizabeth will feel the effects of learnt . No officer is ever to enter into Father house again , nor even to pass through the village . Balls will be absolutely prohibited , unless Elizabeth stand up with one of Elizabeth sisters . And Elizabeth are never to stir out of doors till Elizabeth can prove that Elizabeth have spent ten minutes of every day in a rational manner . ” 
 
  Elizabeth , began to cry . 
 
  “ Well , well , ” said Father , “ do not make Elizabeth unhappy . If Elizabeth are a good girl for the next ten years , Father will take Elizabeth to a review at the end of the next ten years . ” 
 Chapter 
 
  Two days after Father ’s return , as Jane and Elizabeth were walking together in the shrubbery behind the house , Jane and Elizabeth saw the housekeeper coming towards Jane and Elizabeth , and , concluding that the housekeeper came to call Jane and Elizabeth to Jane and Elizabeth mother , went forward to meet the housekeeper ; but , instead of the expected summons , when Jane and Elizabeth approached the housekeeper , the housekeeper said to Miss Bennet , “ the housekeeper beg Miss Bennet pardon , Miss Bennet , for interrupting Miss Bennet , but the housekeeper was in hopes Miss Bennet might have got some good news from town , so the housekeeper took the liberty of coming to ask . Miss Bennet 
 
  Miss Bennet What do the housekeeper mean , Miss Bennet ? We have heard nothing from town . ” 
 
  “ Miss Bennet , ” cried Jane and Elizabeth mother , in great astonishment , “ do n’t Miss Bennet know there is an express come for master from Edward ? master has been here this half - hour , and master has had a letter . ” 
 
  Away ran Jane and Elizabeth , too eager to get in to have time for speech . Jane and Elizabeth ran through the vestibule into the breakfast - room ; from thence to the library ; Father ’s was in neither ; and Jane and Elizabeth were on the point of seeking Father ’s up stairs with Jane and Elizabeth mother , when Jane and Elizabeth were met by the butler , who said : 
 
  “ If Jane and Elizabeth are looking for the butler , who said : 
 
  “ If Jane and Elizabeth are looking for master , Jane and Elizabeth , Father ’s is walking towards the little copse . ” 
 
  Upon this information , Jane and Elizabeth instantly passed through the hall once more , and ran across the lawn after Jane and Elizabeth father , who was deliberately pursuing Father ’s way towards a small wood on one side of the paddock . 
 
  Jane , who was not so light nor so much in the habit of running as Elizabeth , soon lagged behind , while Jane sister , panting for breath , came up with Father ’s , and eagerly cried out : 
 
  “ Oh , Father ’s , what news — what news ? Have Father ’s heard from Jane uncle ? ” 
 
  “ Yes Elizabeth have had a letter from master by express . ” 
 
  “ Well , and what news does a letter from master by express bring — good or bad ? ” 
 
  “ What is there of good to be expected ? ” said Father ’s , taking a letter from Father ’s pocket . “ But perhaps Elizabeth would like to read a letter . ” 
 
  Elizabeth impatiently caught a letter from Father ’s hand . Jane now came up . 
 
  “ Read a letter aloud , ” said Father ’s , “ for Father ’s hardly know Father ’s what a letter is about . ” 
 
  “ Gracechurch Street , Monday , August 2 . 
 
  “ Elizabeth dear Brother , 
  “ At last Elizabeth am able to send Elizabeth dear Brother some tidings of Elizabeth niece , and such as , upon the whole , Elizabeth hope it will give Elizabeth dear Brother satisfaction . Soon after Elizabeth dear Brother left Elizabeth on Saturday , Elizabeth was fortunate enough to find out in what part of London they were . The particulars Elizabeth reserve till we meet ; it is enough to know The particulars are discovered . Elizabeth have seen they — ” 
      “ Then it is as Jane always hoped , ” cried Jane ; “ they are married ! ” 
 
  Elizabeth read on : 
 
  “ Elizabeth have seen they . They are not married , nor can Elizabeth find there was any intention of being so ; but if Elizabeth dear Brother are willing to perform the engagements which Elizabeth have ventured to make on Elizabeth dear Brother side , Elizabeth hope it will not be long before they are . All that is required of Elizabeth dear Brother is , to assure to Elizabeth dear Brother daughter , by settlement , Elizabeth niece equal share of the five thousand pounds secured among Elizabeth dear Brother children after the decease of Elizabeth dear Brother and Elizabeth sister ; and , moreover , to enter into an engagement of allowing Elizabeth niece , during Elizabeth dear Brother life , one hundred pounds per annum . These are conditions which , considering everything , Elizabeth had no hesitation in complying with , as far as Elizabeth thought Elizabeth privileged , for Elizabeth dear Brother . Elizabeth shall send this by express , that no time may be lost in bringing Elizabeth Elizabeth dear Brother answer . Elizabeth dear Brother will easily comprehend , from The particulars , that Charlie ’s circumstances are not so hopeless as Charlie ’s circumstances are generally believed to be . The world has been deceived in that respect ; and Elizabeth am happy to say there will be some little money , even when all Charlie ’s debts are discharged , to settle on Elizabeth niece , in addition to Elizabeth niece own fortune . If , as Elizabeth conclude will be the case , Elizabeth dear Brother send Elizabeth full powers to act in Elizabeth dear Brother name throughout the whole of this business , Elizabeth will immediately give directions to Haggerston for preparing a proper settlement . There will not be the smallest occasion for Elizabeth dear Brother coming to town again ; therefore stay quiet at Longbourn , and depend on Elizabeth diligence and care . Send back Elizabeth dear Brother answer as fast as Elizabeth dear Brother can , and be careful to write explicitly . We have judged it best that Elizabeth niece should be married from the house . Elizabeth niece comes to We to - day . Elizabeth shall write again as soon as anything more is determined on . Elizabeth dear Brother , etc . , 
 
  “ EDW . GARDINER . ” 
 
  “ Is it possible ? ” cried Elizabeth , when Elizabeth had finished . “ Can it be possible that good man will marry Elizabeth niece ? ” 
 
  “ George is not so undeserving , then , as we thought good man , ” said Jane . “ Father ’s , Elizabeth congratulate Father ’s . ” 
 
  “ And have Father ’s answered a letter ? ” cried Elizabeth . 
 
  “ No ; but it must be done soon . ” 
 
  Most earnestly did Elizabeth then entreat Father ’s to lose no more time before Father ’s wrote . 
 
  “ Oh ! Father ’s , ” Elizabeth cried , “ come back and write immediately . Consider how important every moment is in such a case . ” 
 
  “ Let Jane write for Father ’s , ” said Jane , “ if Father ’s dislike the trouble Father ’s . ” 
 
  “ Father ’s dislike the trouble very much , ” Father ’s replied ; “ but it must be done . ” 
 
  And so saying , Father ’s turned back with Jane and Elizabeth , and walked towards the house . 
 
  “ And may Elizabeth ask — ” said Elizabeth ; “ but the terms , Elizabeth suppose , must be complied with . ” 
 
  “ Complied with ! Elizabeth am only ashamed of good man asking so little . ” 
 
  “ And they must marry ! Yet good man is such a man ! ” 
 
  “ Yes , yes , they must marry . There is nothing else to be done . But there are two things that Elizabeth want very much to know ; one is , how much money Elizabeth uncle has laid down to bring it about ; and the other , how am Elizabeth ever to pay Jane uncle . ” 
 
  “ Money ! Elizabeth uncle ! ” cried Jane , “ what do Father ’s mean , Father ’s ? ” 
 
  “ Father ’s mean , that no man in no man in senses would marry Elizabeth niece on so slight a temptation as one hundred a year during Father ’s life , and fifty after Father ’s am gone . ” 
 
  “ That is very true , ” said Elizabeth ; “ though That had not occurred to Elizabeth before . good man debts to be discharged , and something still to remain ! Oh ! it must be Elizabeth uncle ’s doings ! Generous , good man , Elizabeth am afraid good man has distressed good man . A small sum could not do all this . ” 
 
  “ No , ” said Father ’s ; “ good man ’s a fool if good man takes Elizabeth niece with a farthing less than ten thousand pounds . Elizabeth should be sorry to think so ill of good man , in the very beginning of our relationship . ” 
 
  “ Ten thousand pounds ! Heaven forbid ! How is half such a sum to be repaid ? ” 
 
  Father ’s made no answer , and each of Jane and Elizabeth , deep in thought , continued silent till Jane and Elizabeth reached the house . Father ’s then went on to the library to write , and Jane and Elizabeth walked into the breakfast - room . 
 
  “ And they are really to be married ! ” cried Elizabeth , as soon as Jane and Elizabeth were by Jane and Elizabeth . “ How strange are is ! And for are Jane and Elizabeth are to be thankful . That they should marry , small as is they chance of happiness , and wretched as is good man character , Jane and Elizabeth are forced to rejoice . Oh , Elizabeth niece ! ” 
 
  “ Jane comfort Jane with thinking , ” replied Jane , “ that good man certainly would not marry Elizabeth niece if good man had not a real regard for Elizabeth niece . Though Jane uncle has done something towards clearing good man , Jane can not believe that ten thousand pounds , or anything like ten thousand pounds , has been advanced . good man has children of good man own , and may have more . How could good man spare half ten thousand pounds ? ” 
 
  “ If good man were ever able to learn what good man debts have been , ” said Elizabeth , “ and how much is settled on good man side on Elizabeth niece , we shall exactly know what Edward has done for them , because good man has not sixpence of good man own . The kindness of Elizabeth uncle and aunt can never be requited . Elizabeth uncle and aunt taking Elizabeth niece home , and affording Elizabeth niece Elizabeth uncle and aunt personal protection and countenance , is such a sacrifice to Elizabeth niece advantage as years of gratitude can not enough acknowledge . By this time Elizabeth niece is actually with Elizabeth uncle and aunt ! If such goodness does not make Elizabeth niece miserable now , Elizabeth niece will never deserve to be happy ! What a meeting for Elizabeth niece , when Elizabeth niece first sees Elizabeth aunt ! ” 
 
  “ We must endeavour to forget all that has passed on either side , ” said Jane : “ Jane hope and trust they will yet be happy . good man consenting to marry Elizabeth niece is a proof , Jane will believe , that good man is come to a right way of thinking . they mutual affection will steady they ; and Jane flatter Jane they will settle so quietly , and live in so rational a manner , as may in time make they past imprudence forgotten . ” 
 
  “ they conduct has been such , ” replied Elizabeth , “ as neither Jane , nor Elizabeth , nor anybody can ever forget . It is useless to talk of they conduct . ” 
 
  It now occurred to Jane and Elizabeth that Jane and Elizabeth mother was in all likelihood perfectly ignorant of what had happened . Jane and Elizabeth went to the library , therefore , and asked Jane and Elizabeth father whether Father ’s would not wish Jane and Elizabeth to make happened known to Jane and Elizabeth mother . Father ’s was writing and , without raising Father ’s head , coolly replied : 
 
  “ Just as Elizabeth please . ” 
 
  “ May we take Elizabeth uncle ’s letter to read to Elizabeth niece ? ” 
 
  “ Take whatever Elizabeth like , and get away . ” Elizabeth Elizabeth took a letter from Father ’s writing - table , and they went up stairs together . Mary and Kitty were both with Jane and Elizabeth mother : one communication would , therefore , do for all . After a slight preparation for good news , a letter was read aloud . Jane and Elizabeth mother could hardly contain Jane and Elizabeth mother . As soon as Jane had read Edward ’s hope of Elizabeth niece being soon married , Jane joy burst forth , and every following sentence added to Jane joy exuberance . Jane was now in an irritation as violent from delight , as Jane had ever been fidgety from alarm and vexation . To know that Jane daughter would be married was enough . Jane was disturbed by no fear for Jane felicity , nor humbled by any remembrance of Jane misconduct . 
 
  “ Jane dear , dear Lydia ! ” Jane cried . “ This is delightful indeed ! Elizabeth niece will be married ! Jane shall see Elizabeth niece again ! Elizabeth niece will be married at sixteen ! Jane good , kind brother ! Jane knew how it would be . Jane knew Edward would manage everything ! How Jane long to see Elizabeth niece ! and to see good man too ! But the clothes , the clothes ! Jane will write to Jane sister Gardiner about the clothes directly . Elizabeth , Elizabeth dear , run down to Elizabeth father , and ask Father ’s how much Father ’s will give Elizabeth niece . Stay , stay , Elizabeth will go Elizabeth . Ring the bell , Kitty , for Miss Bennet . Elizabeth will put on Elizabeth things in a moment . Jane dear , dear Lydia ! How merry we shall be together when we meet ! ” 
 
  Jane and Elizabeth mother eldest daughter endeavoured to give some relief to the violence of these transports , by leading Elizabeth thoughts to the obligations which Edward ’s behaviour laid them all under . 
 
  “ For we must attribute this happy conclusion , ” Elizabeth added , “ in a great measure to Edward kindness . We are persuaded that Edward has pledged Edward to assist Charlie ’s with money . ” 
 
  “ Well , ” cried Jane and Elizabeth mother , “ it is all very right ; who should do assist but Charlie ’s own uncle ? If Edward had not had a family of Edward own , Elizabeth and Elizabeth children must have had all Edward money , Elizabeth dear Brother know ; and it is the first time Elizabeth and Elizabeth children have ever had anything from Edward , except a few presents . Well ! Jane and Elizabeth mother am so happy ! In a short time Elizabeth shall have Elizabeth niece married . Jane and Elizabeth mother How well it sounds ! And Elizabeth niece was only sixteen last June . Elizabeth dear Jane , Elizabeth am in such a flutter , that Elizabeth am sure Elizabeth ca n’t write ; so Elizabeth will dictate , and Jane write for Elizabeth . We will settle with Jane father about the money afterwards ; but the things should be ordered immediately . ” 
 
  Elizabeth was then proceeding to all the particulars of calico , muslin , and cambric , and would shortly have dictated some very plentiful orders , had not Jane , though with some difficulty , persuaded Elizabeth to wait till Father ’s was at leisure to be consulted . One day ’s delay , Jane observed , would be of small importance ; and Jane mother was too happy to be quite so obstinate as usual . Other schemes , too , came into Elizabeth head . 
 
  “ Elizabeth will go to Meryton , ” said Elizabeth , “ as soon as Elizabeth am dressed , and tell the good , good news to Elizabeth sister Philips . And as Elizabeth come back , Elizabeth can call on Lady Lucas and Mrs. Long . Kitty , run down and order the carriage . An airing would do Elizabeth a great deal of good , Elizabeth am sure . Girls , can Elizabeth do anything for Girls in Meryton ? Oh ! Here comes Miss Bennet ! Elizabeth dear Hill , have Miss Bennet heard the good , good news ? Elizabeth niece is going to be married ; and you shall all have a bowl of punch to make merry at Elizabeth niece wedding . ” 
 
  Miss Bennet began instantly to express Miss Bennet joy . Elizabeth received Miss Bennet congratulations amongst the rest , and then , sick of this folly , took refuge in Elizabeth own room , that Elizabeth might think with freedom . 
 
  Elizabeth niece situation must , at best , be bad enough ; but that Elizabeth niece situation was no worse , Elizabeth had need to be thankful . Elizabeth felt it so ; and though , in looking forward , neither rational happiness nor worldly prosperity could be justly expected for Elizabeth niece , in looking back to what they had feared , only two hours ago , Elizabeth felt all the advantages of what they had gained . 
 Chapter 
 
  Father had very often wished before this period of Father life that , instead of spending Father whole income , Father had laid by an annual sum for the better provision of Father children , and of Father wife , if Father wife survived Father . Father now wished it more than ever . Had Father done Father duty in that respect , Father wife need not have been indebted to Father wife uncle for whatever of honour or credit could now be purchased for Father wife . The satisfaction of prevailing on one of the most worthless young men in Great Britain to be Father wife husband might then have rested in The satisfaction of prevailing on one of the most worthless young men in Great Britain to be Father wife husband proper place . 
 
  Father was seriously concerned that a cause of so little advantage to anyone should be forwarded at the sole expense of Father brother - in - law , and Father was determined , if possible , to find out the extent of Father brother - in - law assistance , and to discharge the obligation as soon as Father could . 
 
  When first Father had married , economy was held to be perfectly useless , for , of course , Father brother - in - law and Father wife were to have a son . a son was to join in cutting off the entail , as soon as a son should be of age , and Father wife and younger children would by that means be provided for . Five daughters successively entered the world , but yet a son was to come ; and Father wife , for many years after Father wife birth , had been certain that a son would . This event had at last been despaired of , but it was then too late to be saving . Father wife had no turn for economy , and Father wife husband ’s love of independence had alone prevented Father brother - in - law and Father wife exceeding Father brother - in - law and Father wife income . 
 
  Five thousand pounds was settled by marriage articles on Father wife and Father children . But in what proportions Five thousand pounds should be divided amongst Father children depended on the will of the parents . This was one point , with regard to Father wife , at least , which was now to be settled , and Father could have no hesitation in acceding to the proposal before Father . In terms of grateful acknowledgment for the kindness of Father brother - in - law , though expressed most concisely , Father then delivered on paper Father perfect approbation of all that was done , and Father willingness to fulfil the engagements that had been made for Father . Father had never before supposed that , could Father brother - in - law be prevailed on to marry Father wife , marry would be done with so little inconvenience to Father as by the present arrangement . Father would scarcely be ten pounds a year the loser by the hundred that was to be paid them ; for , what with Father wife board and pocket allowance , and the continual presents in money which passed to Father wife through Father wife hands , Father wife expenses had been very little within that sum . 
 
  That it would be done with such trifling exertion on Father side , too , was another very welcome surprise ; for Father wish at present was to have as little trouble in the business as possible . When the first transports of rage which had produced Father activity in seeking Father wife were over , Father naturally returned to all Father former indolence . Father letter was soon dispatched ; for , though dilatory in undertaking business , Father was quick in Father letter execution . Father begged to know further particulars of what Father was indebted to Father brother , but was too angry with Father wife to send any message to Father wife . 
 
  The good news spread quickly through the house , and with proportionate speed through the neighbourhood . The good news was borne in the neighbourhood with decent philosophy . To be sure , it would have been more for the advantage of conversation had Father wife come upon the town ; or , as the happiest alternative , been secluded from the world , in some distant farmhouse . But there was much to be talked of in marrying Father wife ; and the good - natured wishes for Father wife well - doing which had proceeded before from all the spiteful old ladies in Meryton lost but a little of all the spiteful old ladies in Meryton spirit in this change of circumstances , because with such an husband Father wife misery was considered certain . 
 
  It was a fortnight since Father wife had been downstairs ; but on this happy day Father wife again took Father wife seat at the head of Father wife table , and in spirits oppressively high . No sentiment of shame gave a damp to Father wife triumph . The marriage of a daughter , which had been the first object of Father wife wishes since Jane was sixteen , was now on the point of accomplishment , and Father wife thoughts and Father wife words ran wholly on those attendants of elegant nuptials , fine muslins , new carriages , and servants . Father wife was busily searching through the neighbourhood for a proper situation for Father wife daughter , and , without knowing or considering what their income might be , rejected many as deficient in size and importance . 
 
  “ Haye Park might do , ” said Father wife , “ if the Gouldings could quit Haye Park — or the great house at Stoke , if the drawing - room were larger ; but Ashworth is too far off ! Father wife could not bear to have Father wife ten miles from Father wife ; and as for Pulvis Lodge , the attics are dreadful . ” 
 
  Father wife husband allowed Father wife to talk on without interruption while the servants remained . But when the servants had withdrawn , Father wife husband ’s said to Father wife : “ Father wife , before Father wife take any or all of these houses for Father wife son and Father wife , let us come to a right understanding . Into one house in this neighbourhood Father wife son and Father wife shall never have admittance . Father wife husband ’s will not encourage the impudence of either , by receiving Father wife son and Father wife at Longbourn . ” 
 
  A long dispute followed this declaration ; but Father was firm . A long dispute soon led to another ; and Father wife found , with amazement and horror , that Father would not advance a guinea to buy clothes for Father wife . Father protested that Father wife should receive from Father no mark of affection whatever on the occasion . Father wife could hardly comprehend it . That Father anger could be carried to such a point of inconceivable resentment as to refuse Father daughter a privilege without which Father wife marriage would scarcely seem valid , exceeded all Father wife could believe possible . Father wife was more alive to the disgrace which Father wife want of new clothes must reflect on Father wife nuptials , than to any sense of shame at Father wife eloping and living with Father brother - in - law a fortnight before Father wife nuptials took place . 
 
  Father wife was now most heartily sorry that Father wife had , from the distress of the moment , been led to make Father brother - in - law acquainted with their fears for Father wife sister ; for since Father wife marriage would so shortly give the proper termination to the elopement , their might hope to conceal the elopement unfavourable beginning from all those who were not immediately on the spot . 
 
  Father wife had no fear of the elopement spreading farther through Father brother - in - law means . There were few people on whose secrecy Father wife would have more confidently depended ; but , at the same time , there was no one whose knowledge of a sister ’s frailty would have mortified Father wife so much — not , however , from any fear of disadvantage from a sister ’s frailty individually to Father wife , for , at any rate , there seemed a gulf impassable between them . Had Father wife marriage been concluded on the most honourable terms , it was not to be supposed that Father brother - in - law would connect Father brother - in - law with a family where , to every other objection , would now be added an alliance and relationship of the nearest kind with Father brother - in - law Father brother - in - law so justly scorned . 
 
  From such a connection Father wife could not wonder that Father brother - in - law would shrink . The wish of procuring Father wife regard , which Father wife had assured Father wife of Father brother - in - law feeling in Derbyshire , could not in rational expectation survive such a blow as this . Father wife was humbled , Father wife was grieved ; Father wife repented , though Father wife hardly knew of what . Father wife became jealous of Father brother - in - law esteem , when Father wife could no longer hope to be benefited by Father brother - in - law esteem . Father wife wanted to hear of Father brother - in - law , when there seemed the least chance of gaining intelligence . Father wife was convinced that Father wife could have been happy with Father brother - in - law , when it was no longer likely they should meet . 
 
  What a triumph for Father brother - in - law , as Father wife often thought , could Father brother - in - law know that the proposals which Father wife had proudly spurned only four months ago , would now have been most gladly and gratefully received ! Father brother - in - law was as generous , Father wife doubted not , as the most generous of Father brother - in - law sex ; but while Father brother - in - law was mortal , there must be a triumph . 
 
  Father wife began now to comprehend that Father brother - in - law was exactly the man who , in disposition and talents , would most suit Father wife . Father brother - in - law understanding and temper , though unlike Father wife own , would have answered all Father wife wishes . It was an union that must have been to the advantage of both ; by Father wife ease and liveliness , Father brother - in - law mind might have been softened , Father brother - in - law manners improved ; and from Father brother - in - law judgement , information , and knowledge of the world , Father wife must have received benefit of greater importance . 
 
  But no such happy marriage could now teach the admiring multitude what connubial felicity really was . An union of a different tendency , and precluding the possibility of the other , was soon to be formed in both family . 
 
  How Father brother - in - law and Father wife were to be supported in tolerable independence , Father wife could not imagine . But how little of permanent happiness could belong to a couple who were only brought together because a couple who were only brought together because passions were stronger than a couple who were only brought together because virtue , Father wife could easily conjecture . 
 
  Edward soon wrote again to Edward brother . To Father ’s acknowledgments Edward briefly replied , with assurance of Edward eagerness to promote the welfare of any of Edward family ; and concluded with entreaties that the subject might never be mentioned to Edward again . The principal purport of Edward letter was to inform Edward brother that Charlie had resolved on quitting the militia . 
 
  “ It was greatly Edward wish that Charlie should do so , ” Edward added , “ as soon as Charlie marriage was fixed on . And Edward think Edward brother will agree with Edward , in considering the removal from the militia as highly advisable , both on Charlie account and Edward niece ’s . It is Charlie ’s intention to go into the regulars ; and among Charlie former friends , there are still some who are able and willing to assist Charlie in the army . Charlie has the promise of an ensigncy in General — — ’s regiment , now quartered in the North . It is an advantage to have General — — ’s regiment , now quartered in the North so far from this part of the kingdom . Charlie promises fairly ; and Edward hope among different people , where they may each have a character to preserve , they will both be more prudent . Edward have written to Colonel Forster , to inform Colonel Forster of our present arrangements , and to request that Colonel Forster will satisfy the various creditors of Charlie in and near Brighton , with assurances of speedy payment , for which Edward have pledged Edward . And will Edward brother give Edward brother the trouble of carrying similar assurances to Charlie creditors in Meryton , of whom Edward shall subjoin a list according to Charlie information ? Charlie has given in all Charlie debts ; Edward hope at least Charlie has not deceived us . Charlie has our directions , and all will be completed in a week . They will then join General — — ’s regiment , now quartered in the North , unless they are first invited to Longbourn ; and Edward understand from Madeline , that Father wife is very desirous of seeing Edward brother before Father wife leaves the South . Father wife is well , and begs to be dutifully remembered to Edward brother and Father wife mother.—Yours , etc . , 
 
  “ Edward . ” 
 
  Father and Father daughters saw all the advantages of Father brother - in - law removal from the — — shire as clearly as Edward could do . But Father wife was not so well pleased with Father brother - in - law removal . Father wife being settled in the North , just when Father wife had expected most pleasure and pride in Father wife company , for Father wife had by no means given up Father wife plan of their residing in Hertfordshire , was a severe disappointment ; and , besides , it was such a pity that Father wife should be taken from a regiment where Father wife was acquainted with everybody , and had so many favourites . 
 
  “ Father wife is so fond of Colonel Forster , ” said Father wife , “ it will be quite shocking to send Father wife away ! And there are several of the young men , too , that Father wife likes very much . The officers may not be so pleasant in General — — ’s regiment , now quartered in the North . ” 
 
  Father daughter ’s request , for such it might be considered , of being admitted into both family again before Father wife set off for the North , received at first an absolute negative . But Jane and Elizabeth , who agreed in wishing , for the sake of Father wife feelings and consequence , that Father wife should be noticed on Father wife marriage by the parents , urged Father brother - in - law so earnestly yet so rationally and so mildly , to receive Father wife and Father brother - in - law at Longbourn , as soon as Father wife and Father brother - in - law were married , that Father brother - in - law was prevailed on to think as Father wife and Father brother - in - law thought , and act as Father wife and Father brother - in - law wished . And Father wife had the satisfaction of knowing that Father wife would be able to show Father wife in the neighbourhood before Father wife was banished to the North . When Father wrote again to Father brother , therefore , Father sent Father permission for Father wife and Father brother - in - law to come ; and it was settled , that as soon as the ceremony was over , Father wife and Father brother - in - law should proceed to Longbourn . Father wife was surprised , however , that Father brother - in - law should consent to such a scheme , and had Father wife consulted only Father wife own inclination , any meeting with Father brother - in - law would have been the last object of Father wife wishes . 
 Chapter 
 
  Their sister ’s wedding day arrived ; and Jane and Elizabeth felt for Their sister ’s probably more than Their sister ’s felt for Their sister ’s . The carriage was sent to meet the young couple at — — , and the young couple were to return in The carriage by dinner - time . the young couple arrival was dreaded by the elder Miss Bennets , and Jane more especially , who gave Their sister ’s the feelings which would have attended Jane , had Jane been the culprit , and was wretched in the thought of what Jane sister must endure . 
 
  the young couple came . The family were assembled in the breakfast room to receive the young couple . Smiles decked the face of Mother as the carriage drove up to the door ; Mother husband looked impenetrably grave ; Mother daughters , alarmed , anxious , uneasy . 
 
  Their sister ’s voice was heard in the vestibule ; the door was thrown open , and Their sister ’s ran into the room . Their sister ’s mother stepped forwards , embraced Their sister ’s , and welcomed Their sister ’s with rapture ; gave Mother hand , with an affectionate smile , to George , who followed Their sister ’s ; and wished the young couple joy with an alacrity which shewed no doubt of the young couple happiness . 
 
  the young couple reception from Father , to whom the young couple then turned , was not quite so cordial . Father , to whom the young couple then turned countenance rather gained in austerity ; and Father , to whom the young couple then turned scarcely opened Father , to whom the young couple then turned lips . The easy assurance of the young couple , indeed , was enough to provoke Father , to whom the young couple then turned . Elizabeth was disgusted , and the elder Miss Bennets was shocked . Their sister ’s was Lydia still ; untamed , unabashed , wild , noisy , and fearless . Their sister ’s turned from sister to sister , demanding their congratulations ; and when at length their sat down , looked eagerly round the room , took notice of some little alteration in the room , and observed , with a laugh , that it was a great while since Their sister ’s had been there . 
 
  George , who followed was not at all more distressed than Their sister ’s , but George , who followed manners were always so pleasing , that had George , who followed character and George , who followed marriage been exactly what George , who followed character and George , who followed marriage ought , George , who followed smiles and George , who followed easy address , while George , who followed claimed their relationship , would have delighted their . Elizabeth had not before believed George , who followed quite equal to such assurance ; but Elizabeth sat down , resolving within Elizabeth to draw no limits in future to the impudence of an impudent man . Elizabeth blushed , and Jane blushed ; but the cheeks of Jane and Elizabeth Jane and Elizabeth confusion suffered no variation of colour . 
 
  There was no want of discourse . Their sister ’s and Their sister ’s mother could neither of Their sister ’s and Their sister ’s mother talk fast enough ; and George , who followed , began enquiring after George , who followed acquaintance in that neighbourhood , with a good humoured ease which Elizabeth felt very unable to equal in Elizabeth replies . Their sister ’s and Their sister ’s mother seemed each of Their sister ’s and Their sister ’s mother to have the happiest memories in the world . Nothing of the past was recollected with pain ; and Their sister ’s led voluntarily to subjects which Their sister ’s sisters would not have alluded to for the world . 
 
  “ Only think of its being three months , ” Their sister ’s cried , “ since Their sister ’s went away ; it seems but a fortnight Their sister ’s declare ; and yet there have been things enough happened in the time . Good gracious ! when Their sister ’s went away , Their sister ’s am sure Their sister ’s had no more idea of being married till Their sister ’s came back again ! though Their sister ’s thought it would be very good fun if Their sister ’s was . ” 
 
  Their sister ’s father lifted up Father , to whom the young couple then turned eyes . Jane was distressed . Elizabeth looked expressively at Their sister ’s ; but Elizabeth Elizabeth chose to be insensible , gaily continued , “ Oh ! Mother , do the people hereabouts know Elizabeth am married to - day ? Elizabeth was afraid the people hereabouts might not ; and we overtook William Goulding in William Goulding curricle , so Elizabeth was determined William Goulding should know am , and so Elizabeth let down the side - glass next to William Goulding , and took off Elizabeth glove , and let Elizabeth hand just rest upon the window frame , so that William Goulding might see the ring , and then Elizabeth bowed and smiled like anything . ” Elizabeth Elizabeth could bear it no longer . Elizabeth got up , and ran out of the room ; and returned no more , till Elizabeth heard the young couple passing through the hall to the dining parlour . Elizabeth then joined the young couple soon enough to see Their sister ’s , with anxious parade , walk up to Their sister ’s mother ’s right hand , and hear Their sister ’s say to Their sister ’s eldest sister , “ Ah ! Jane , Their sister ’s take Jane place now , and Jane must go lower , because Their sister ’s am a married woman . ” 
 
  It was not to be supposed that time would give Their sister ’s that embarrassment from which Their sister ’s had been so wholly free at first . Their sister ’s ease and good spirits increased . Their sister ’s longed to see Mrs. Phillips , the Lucases , and all their other neighbours , and to hear Their sister ’s called “ Mrs. Wickham ” by each of Mrs. Phillips , the Lucases , and all their other neighbours ; and in the mean time , Their sister ’s went after dinner to show Their sister ’s ring , and boast of being married , to Mrs. Phillips and the two housemaids . 
 
  “ Well , Mother , ” said Their sister ’s , when they were all returned to the breakfast room , “ and what do Mother think of Mother husband ? Is not Mother husband a charming man ? Their sister ’s am sure Their sister ’s sisters must all envy Their sister ’s . Their sister ’s only hope Their sister ’s sisters may have half Their sister ’s good luck . Their sister ’s sisters must all go to Brighton . Brighton is the place to get husbands . What a pity it is , Mother , we did not all go . ” 
 
  “ Very true ; and if Mother had Mother will , we should . But Mother dear Lydia , Mother do n’t at all like Their sister ’s going such a way off . Must going be so ? ” 
 
  “ Oh , lord ! yes;—there is nothing in that . Their sister ’s shall like it of all things . Mother and George , who followed , and Their sister ’s sisters , must come down and see us . us shall be at Newcastle all the winter , and Their sister ’s dare say there will be some balls , and Their sister ’s will take care to get good partners for them all . ” 
 
  “ Mother should like it beyond anything ! ” said Their sister ’s mother . 
 
  “ And then when Their sister ’s go away , Their sister ’s may leave one or two of Mother sisters behind Their sister ’s ; and Mother dare say Mother shall get husbands for one or two of Mother sisters before the winter is over . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth thank Mother for Elizabeth share of the favour , ” said Elizabeth ; “ but Elizabeth do not particularly like Mother way of getting husbands . ” 
 
  the young couple visitors were not to remain above ten days with the young couple . Charlie had received Charlie commission before Charlie left London , and Charlie was to join Charlie regiment at the end of a fortnight . 
 
  No one but Mother regretted that the young couple visitors stay would be so short ; and Mother made the most of the time by visiting about with Their sister ’s , and having very frequent parties at home . very frequent parties at home were acceptable to all ; to avoid a family circle was even more desirable to such as did think , than such as did not . 
 
  George , who followed affection for Their sister ’s was just what Elizabeth had expected to find George , who followed affection for Their sister ’s ; not equal to Their sister ’s for George , who followed . Elizabeth had scarcely needed Elizabeth present observation to be satisfied , from the reason of things , that their elopement had been brought on by the strength of Their sister ’s love , rather than by George , who followed ; and Elizabeth would have wondered why , without violently caring for Their sister ’s , George , who followed chose to elope with Their sister ’s at all , had Their sister ’s not felt certain that George , who followed flight was rendered necessary by distress of circumstances ; and if was were the case , George , who followed was not the young man to resist an opportunity of having a companion . 
 
  Their sister ’s was exceedingly fond of George , who followed . George , who followed was Their sister ’s dear George on every occasion ; no one was to be put in competition with George , who followed . George , who followed did every thing best in the world ; and Their sister ’s was sure George , who followed would kill more birds on the first of September , than any body else in the country . 
 
  One morning , soon after the young couple visitors arrival , as Their sister ’s was sitting with Their sister ’s two elder sisters , Their sister ’s said to Elizabeth : 
 
  “ Elizabeth , Their sister ’s never gave Elizabeth an account of Their sister ’s wedding , Their sister ’s believe . Elizabeth were not by , when Their sister ’s told Mother and the others all about Their sister ’s wedding . Are not Elizabeth curious to hear how Their sister ’s wedding was managed ? ” 
 
  “ No really , ” replied Elizabeth ; “ Elizabeth think there can not be too little said on the subject . ” 
 
  “ La ! Their sister ’s are so strange ! But Their sister ’s must tell the young couple how Their sister ’s wedding went off . We were married , you know , at St. Clement ’s , because George , who followed lodgings were in St. Clement ’s . And it was settled that we should all be there by eleven o’clock . Their sister ’s uncle and aunt and Their sister ’s were to go together ; and the others were to meet We at the church . Well , Monday morning came , and Their sister ’s was in such a fuss ! Their sister ’s was so afraid , you know , that something would happen to put Their sister ’s wedding off , and then Their sister ’s should have gone quite distracted . And there was Their sister ’s aunt , all the time Their sister ’s was dressing , preaching and talking away just as if Their sister ’s aunt was reading a sermon . However , Their sister ’s did not hear above one word in ten , for Their sister ’s was thinking , Mother may suppose , of George , who followed . Their sister ’s longed to know whether George , who followed would be married in George , who followed blue coat . ” 
 
  “ Well , and so we breakfasted at ten as usual ; Their sister ’s thought it would never be over ; for , by the bye , the young couple are to understand , that Their sister ’s uncle and aunt were horrid unpleasant all the time Their sister ’s was with Their sister ’s uncle and aunt . If the young couple ’ll believe Their sister ’s , Their sister ’s did not once put Their sister ’s foot out of doors , though Their sister ’s was there a fortnight . Not one party , or scheme , or anything . To be sure London was rather thin , but , however , the Little Theatre was open . Well , and so just as the carriage came to the door , Their sister ’s uncle was called away upon business to that horrid man Mr. Stone . And then , you know , when once they get together , there is no end of it . Well , Their sister ’s was so frightened Their sister ’s did not know what to do , for Their sister ’s uncle was to give Their sister ’s away ; and if we were beyond the hour , we could not be married all day . But , luckily , Their sister ’s uncle came back again in ten minutes ’ time , and then we all set out . However , Their sister ’s recollected afterwards that if Their sister ’s uncle had been prevented going , Their sister ’s wedding need not be put off , for Fitzwilliam might have done as well . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam ! ” repeated Elizabeth , in utter amazement . 
 
  “ Oh , yes!—he was to come there with George , who followed , you know . But gracious Their sister ’s ! Their sister ’s quite forgot ! Their sister ’s ought not to have said a word about it . Their sister ’s promised them so faithfully ! What will George , who followed say ? It was to be such a secret ! ” 
 
  “ If it was to be secret , ” said Jane , “ say not another word on the subject . Their sister ’s may depend upon Jane seeking no further . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! certainly , ” said Elizabeth , though burning with curiosity ; “ we will ask Their sister ’s no questions . ” 
 
  “ Thank Elizabeth , ” said Their sister ’s , “ for if Elizabeth did , Their sister ’s should certainly tell the young couple , and then George , who followed would be angry . ” 
 
  On such encouragement to ask , Elizabeth was forced to put it out of Elizabeth power , by running away . 
 
  But to live in ignorance on such a point was impossible ; or at least it was impossible not to try for information . Fitzwilliam had been at Their sister ’s wedding . It was exactly a scene , and exactly among people , where Fitzwilliam had apparently least to do , and least temptation to go . Conjectures as to the meaning of it , rapid and wild , hurried into Elizabeth brain ; but Elizabeth was satisfied with none . Those that best pleased Elizabeth , as placing Fitzwilliam conduct in the noblest light , seemed most improbable . Elizabeth could not bear such suspense ; and hastily seizing a sheet of paper , wrote a short letter to Elizabeth aunt , to request an explanation of what Their sister ’s had dropt , if an explanation of what Their sister ’s had dropt were compatible with the secrecy which had been intended . 
 
  “ the young couple may readily comprehend , ” Elizabeth added , “ what Elizabeth curiosity must be to know how a person unconnected with any of us , and ( comparatively speaking ) a stranger to our family , should have been amongst the young couple at such a time . Pray write instantly , and let Their sister ’s understand it — unless it is , for very cogent reasons , to remain in the secrecy which Their sister ’s seems to think necessary ; and then Their sister ’s must endeavour to be satisfied with ignorance . ” 
 
  “ Not that Their sister ’s shall , though , ” Their sister ’s added to Their sister ’s , as Their sister ’s finished a short letter ; “ and Their sister ’s aunt , if Their sister ’s aunt do not tell Their sister ’s in an honourable manner , Their sister ’s shall certainly be reduced to tricks and stratagems to find it out . ” 
 
  Jane ’s delicate sense of honour would not allow Jane to speak to Elizabeth privately of what Their sister ’s had let fall ; Elizabeth was glad of it;—till it appeared whether Elizabeth enquiries would receive any satisfaction , Elizabeth had rather be without a confidante . 
 Chapter 
 
  Elizabeth had the satisfaction of receiving an answer to Elizabeth letter as soon as Elizabeth possibly could . Elizabeth was no sooner in possession of an answer to Elizabeth letter than , hurrying into the little copse , where Elizabeth was least likely to be interrupted , Elizabeth sat down on one of the benches and prepared to be happy ; for the length of Elizabeth letter convinced Elizabeth that Elizabeth letter did not contain a denial . 
 
  “ Gracechurch Street , Sept. 6 . 
 
  “ Elizabeth , 
 
  “ M. GARDINER have just received Elizabeth letter , and shall devote this whole morning to answering Elizabeth letter , as M. GARDINER foresee that a little writing will not comprise what M. GARDINER have to tell Elizabeth . M. GARDINER must confess M. GARDINER surprised by Elizabeth application ; M. GARDINER did not expect Elizabeth application from Elizabeth . Do n’t think M. GARDINER angry , however , for M. GARDINER only mean to let Elizabeth know that M. GARDINER had not imagined such enquiries to be necessary on Elizabeth side . If Elizabeth do not choose to understand M. GARDINER , forgive M. GARDINER impertinence . Elizabeth uncle is as much surprised as M. GARDINER am — and nothing but the belief of Elizabeth being a party concerned would have allowed Elizabeth uncle to act as Elizabeth uncle has done . But if Elizabeth are really innocent and ignorant , M. GARDINER must be more explicit . 
 
  “ On the very day of M. GARDINER coming home from Longbourn , Elizabeth uncle had a most unexpected visitor . Fitzwilliam called , and was shut up with Elizabeth uncle several hours . It was all over before M. GARDINER arrived ; so M. GARDINER curiosity was not so dreadfully racked as Elizabeth seems to have been . a most unexpected visitor came to tell Edward that a most unexpected visitor had found out where Elizabeth sister and Charlie were , and that a most unexpected visitor had seen and talked with Elizabeth sister and Charlie ; George repeatedly , Lydia once . From what M. GARDINER can collect , a most unexpected visitor left Derbyshire only one day after ourselves , and came to town with the resolution of hunting for Elizabeth sister and Charlie . The motive professed was a most unexpected visitor conviction of its being owing to a most unexpected visitor that George ’s worthlessness had not been so well known as to make it impossible for any young woman of character to love or confide in a most unexpected visitor . a most unexpected visitor generously imputed the whole to a most unexpected visitor mistaken pride , and confessed that a most unexpected visitor had before thought it beneath a most unexpected visitor to lay a most unexpected visitor private actions open to the world . a most unexpected visitor character was to speak for a most unexpected visitor character . a most unexpected visitor called it , therefore , a most unexpected visitor duty to step forward , and endeavour to remedy an evil which had been brought on by a most unexpected visitor . If a most unexpected visitor had another motive , M. GARDINER am sure another motive would never disgrace a most unexpected visitor . a most unexpected visitor had been some days in town , before a most unexpected visitor was able to discover Elizabeth sister and Charlie ; but a most unexpected visitor had something to direct a most unexpected visitor search , which was more than ourselves had ; and the consciousness of something to direct a most unexpected visitor search , which was more than ourselves had was another reason for a most unexpected visitor resolving to follow ourselves . 
 
  “ There is a lady , it seems , a Mrs. Younge , who was some time ago governess to Georgiana , and was dismissed from her charge on some cause of disapprobation , though a most unexpected visitor did not say what . This Mrs. Younge then took a large house in Edward - street , and has since maintained This Mrs. Younge by letting lodgings . This Mrs. Younge was , a most unexpected visitor knew , intimately acquainted with George ; and a most unexpected visitor went to This Mrs. Younge for intelligence of George as soon as a most unexpected visitor got to town . But it was two or three days before a most unexpected visitor could get from This Mrs. Younge what a most unexpected visitor wanted . This Mrs. Younge would not betray This Mrs. Younge trust , M. GARDINER suppose , without bribery and corruption , for This Mrs. Younge really did know where This Mrs. Younge friend was to be found . George indeed had gone to This Mrs. Younge on their first arrival in London , and had This Mrs. Younge been able to receive their into This Mrs. Younge house , their would have taken up their abode with This Mrs. Younge . At length , however , a most unexpected visitor procured the wished - for direction . They were in — — street . a most unexpected visitor saw George , and afterwards insisted on seeing Lydia . a most unexpected visitor first object with Lydia , a most unexpected visitor acknowledged , had been to persuade Lydia to quit Lydia present disgraceful situation , and return to Lydia friends as soon as Lydia friends could be prevailed on to receive Lydia , offering a most unexpected visitor assistance , as far as it would go . But a most unexpected visitor found Lydia absolutely resolved on remaining where Lydia was . Lydia cared for none of Lydia friends ; Lydia wanted no help of a most unexpected visitor ; Lydia would not hear of leaving George . Lydia was sure they should be married some time or other , and it did not much signify when . Since such were Lydia feelings , it only remained , a most unexpected visitor thought , to secure and expedite a marriage , which , in a most unexpected visitor very first conversation with George , a most unexpected visitor easily learnt had never been a most unexpected visitor design . a most unexpected visitor confessed a most unexpected visitor obliged to leave the regiment , on account of some debts of honour , which were very pressing ; and scrupled not to lay all the ill - consequences of Lydia ’s flight on Lydia own folly alone . a most unexpected visitor meant to resign a most unexpected visitor commission immediately ; and as to a most unexpected visitor future situation , a most unexpected visitor could conjecture very little about a most unexpected visitor future situation . George must go somewhere , but George did not know where , and George knew George should have nothing to live on . 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam asked George why George had not married Elizabeth sister at once . Though George was not imagined to be very rich , Fitzwilliam would have been able to do something for George , and George situation must have been benefited by marriage . But Fitzwilliam found , in reply to this question , that George still cherished the hope of more effectually making George fortune by marriage in some other country . Under such circumstances , however , George was not likely to be proof against the temptation of immediate relief . 
 
  “ They met several times , for there was much to be discussed . George of course wanted more than George could get ; but at length was reduced to be reasonable . 
 
  “ Everything being settled between they , Fitzwilliam ’s next step was to make Elizabeth uncle acquainted with it , and Fitzwilliam first called in Gracechurch street the evening before Elizabeth came home . But Edward could not be seen , and Fitzwilliam found , on further enquiry , that Elizabeth father was still with Fitzwilliam , but would quit town the next morning . Fitzwilliam did not judge George to be a person whom Fitzwilliam could so properly consult as Elizabeth uncle , and therefore readily postponed seeing George till after the departure of George . Fitzwilliam did not leave Fitzwilliam name , and till the next day it was only known that Fitzwilliam had called on business . 
 
  “ On Saturday Fitzwilliam came again . George was gone , Elizabeth uncle at home , and , as M. GARDINER said before , they had a great deal of talk together . 
 
  “ They met again on Sunday , and then M. GARDINER saw Fitzwilliam too . It was not all settled before Monday : as soon as it was , the express was sent off to Longbourn . But ourselves visitor was very obstinate . M. GARDINER fancy , Elizabeth , that obstinacy is the real defect of Fitzwilliam character , after all . Fitzwilliam has been accused of many faults at different times , but this is the true one . Nothing was to be done that Fitzwilliam did not do Fitzwilliam ; though M. GARDINER am sure ( and M. GARDINER do not speak it to be thanked , therefore say nothing about it ) , Elizabeth uncle would most readily have settled the whole . 
 
  “ They battled it together for a long time , which was more than either the gentleman or lady concerned in it deserved . But at last Elizabeth uncle was forced to yield , and instead of being allowed to be of use to Elizabeth sister , was forced to put up with only having the probable credit of it , which went sorely against the grain ; and M. GARDINER really believe Elizabeth letter this morning gave Elizabeth uncle great pleasure , because Elizabeth letter this morning required an explanation that would rob Elizabeth uncle of Elizabeth uncle borrowed feathers , and give the praise where the praise was due . But , Elizabeth , this must go no farther than Elizabeth , or Jane at most . 
 
  “ Elizabeth know pretty well , M. GARDINER suppose , what has been done for the young people . a most unexpected visitor debts are to be paid , amounting , M. GARDINER believe , to considerably more than a thousand pounds , another thousand in addition to Lydia own settled upon Lydia , and a most unexpected visitor commission purchased . The reason why all this was to be done by him alone , was such as M. GARDINER have given above . It was owing to him alone , to him alone reserve and want of proper consideration , that George ’s character had been so misunderstood , and consequently that George had been received and noticed as George was . Perhaps there was some truth in this ; though M. GARDINER doubt whether him alone reserve , or anybody ’s reserve , can be answerable for the event . But in spite of all this fine talking , M. GARDINER dear Elizabeth , Elizabeth may rest perfectly assured that Elizabeth uncle would never have yielded , if we had not given him alone credit for another interest in the affair . 
 
  “ When all this was resolved on , George returned again to George friends , who were still staying at Pemberley ; but it was agreed that George should be in London once more when the wedding took place , and all money matters were then to receive the last finish . 
 
  “ M. GARDINER believe M. GARDINER have now told Elizabeth every thing . It is a relation which Elizabeth tell M. GARDINER is to give Elizabeth great surprise ; M. GARDINER hope at least a relation which Elizabeth tell M. GARDINER is to give Elizabeth great surprise will not afford Elizabeth any displeasure . Lydia came to us ; and George had constant admission to the house . George was exactly what George had been , when M. GARDINER knew George in Hertfordshire ; but M. GARDINER would not tell Elizabeth how little M. GARDINER was satisfied with Lydia behaviour while Lydia staid with us , if M. GARDINER had not perceived , by Jane ’s letter last Wednesday , that Lydia conduct on coming home was exactly of a piece with it , and therefore what M. GARDINER now tell Elizabeth can give Elizabeth no fresh pain . M. GARDINER talked to Lydia repeatedly in the most serious manner , representing to Lydia all the wickedness of what Lydia had done , and all the unhappiness Lydia had brought on Lydia family . If Lydia heard M. GARDINER , it was by good luck , for M. GARDINER am sure Lydia did not listen . M. GARDINER was sometimes quite provoked , but then M. GARDINER recollected M. GARDINER dear Elizabeth and Jane , and for Elizabeth sister and Charlie sakes had patience with Lydia . 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam was punctual in Fitzwilliam return , and as Lydia informed Elizabeth , attended the wedding . Fitzwilliam dined with us the next day , and was to leave town again on Wednesday or Thursday . Will Elizabeth be very angry with M. GARDINER , M. GARDINER dear Elizabeth , if M. GARDINER take this opportunity of saying ( what M. GARDINER was never bold enough to say before ) how much M. GARDINER like Fitzwilliam . Fitzwilliam behaviour to us has , in every respect , been as pleasing as when us were in Derbyshire . Fitzwilliam understanding and opinions all please M. GARDINER ; Fitzwilliam wants nothing but a little more liveliness , and that , if Fitzwilliam marry prudently , Fitzwilliam wife may teach Fitzwilliam . M. GARDINER thought Fitzwilliam very sly;—he hardly ever mentioned Elizabeth name . But slyness seems the fashion . 
 
  “ Pray forgive M. GARDINER if M. GARDINER have been very presuming , or at least do not punish M. GARDINER so far as to exclude M. GARDINER from P. M. GARDINER shall never be quite happy till M. GARDINER have been all round the park . A low phaeton , with a nice little pair of ponies , would be the very thing . 
 
  “ But M. GARDINER must write no more . The children have been wanting M. GARDINER this half hour . 
 
  “ Elizabeth , very sincerely , 
  “ M. GARDINER . ” 
 
  The contents of this letter threw Elizabeth into a flutter of spirits , in which it was difficult to determine whether pleasure or pain bore the greatest share . The vague and unsettled suspicions which uncertainty had produced of what Fitzwilliam might have been doing to forward Elizabeth sister ’s match , which Elizabeth had feared to encourage as an exertion of goodness too great to be probable , and at the same time dreaded to be just , from the pain of obligation , were proved beyond their greatest extent to be true ! Fitzwilliam had followed them purposely to town , Fitzwilliam had taken on Fitzwilliam all the trouble and mortification attendant on such a research ; in which supplication had been necessary to a woman whom Fitzwilliam must abominate and despise , and where Fitzwilliam was reduced to meet , frequently meet , reason with , persuade , and finally bribe , Fitzwilliam Fitzwilliam always most wished to avoid , and whose very name it was punishment to Fitzwilliam to pronounce . Fitzwilliam had done all this for Elizabeth sister . Elizabeth heart did whisper that Fitzwilliam had done all this for Elizabeth . But whisper was a hope shortly checked by other considerations , and Elizabeth soon felt that even Elizabeth vanity was insufficient , when required to depend on Fitzwilliam affection for Elizabeth — for a woman who had already refused Fitzwilliam — as able to overcome a sentiment so natural as abhorrence against relationship with George . George George ! Every kind of pride must revolt from the connection . George had , to be sure , done much . Elizabeth was ashamed to think how much . But George had given a reason for George interference , which asked no extraordinary stretch of belief . It was reasonable that George should feel George had been wrong ; George had liberality , and George had the means of exercising liberality ; and though Elizabeth would not place Elizabeth as George principal inducement , Elizabeth could , perhaps , believe that remaining partiality for Elizabeth might assist George endeavours in a cause where Elizabeth peace of mind must be materially concerned . It was painful , exceedingly painful , to know that they were under obligations to George . They owed the restoration of Lydia , Lydia character , every thing , to George . Oh ! how heartily did Elizabeth grieve over every ungracious sensation Elizabeth had ever encouraged , every saucy speech Elizabeth had ever directed towards George . For Elizabeth Elizabeth was humbled ; but Elizabeth was proud of George . Proud that in a cause of compassion and honour , George had been able to get the better of George . Elizabeth read over Elizabeth sister commendation of George again and again . Elizabeth sister commendation of George was hardly enough ; but Elizabeth sister commendation of George pleased Elizabeth . Elizabeth was even sensible of some pleasure , though mixed with regret , on finding how steadfastly both Elizabeth and Elizabeth uncle had been persuaded that affection and confidence subsisted between Fitzwilliam and Elizabeth . 
 
  Elizabeth was roused from Elizabeth seat , and Elizabeth reflections , by some one ’s approach ; and before Elizabeth could strike into another path , Elizabeth was overtaken by George . 
 
  “ George am afraid George interrupt Elizabeth solitary ramble , Elizabeth ? ” said George , as George joined Elizabeth . 
 
  “ George certainly do , ” Elizabeth replied with a smile ; “ but it does not follow that the interruption must be unwelcome . ” 
 
  “ George should be sorry indeed , if interrupt were . they were always good friends ; and now they are better . ” 
 
  “ True . Are the others coming out ? ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth do not know . Mother and Lydia are going in the carriage to Meryton . And so , George dear sister , George find , from they uncle and aunt , that Elizabeth have actually seen Pemberley . ” 
 
  Elizabeth replied in the affirmative . 
 
  “ Elizabeth almost envy George the pleasure , and yet Elizabeth believe it would be too much for Elizabeth , or else Elizabeth could take it in Elizabeth way to Newcastle . And Elizabeth saw This Mrs. Younge , Elizabeth suppose ? Poor Reynolds , This Mrs. Younge was always very fond of Elizabeth . But of course This Mrs. Younge did not mention M. GARDINER name to George . ” 
 
  “ Yes , This Mrs. Younge did . ” 
 
  “ And what did This Mrs. Younge say ? ” 
 
  “ That George were gone into the regiment , and This Mrs. Younge was afraid had — not turned out well . At such a distance as that , you know , things are strangely misrepresented . ” 
 
  “ Certainly , ” George replied , biting George lips . Elizabeth hoped Elizabeth had silenced George ; but George soon afterwards said : 
 
  “ George was surprised to see Fitzwilliam in town last month . We passed each other several times . George wonder what Fitzwilliam can be doing there . ” 
 
  “ Perhaps preparing for Fitzwilliam marriage with Cathleen , ” said Elizabeth . “ It must be something particular , to take Fitzwilliam there at this time of year . ” 
 
  “ Undoubtedly . Did Elizabeth see Fitzwilliam while Elizabeth were at Lambton ? George thought George understood from the Gardiners that Elizabeth had . ” 
 
  “ Yes ; Fitzwilliam introduced us to Fitzwilliam sister . ” 
 
  “ And do Elizabeth like Cathleen ? ” 
 
  “ Very much . ” 
 
  “ George have heard , indeed , that Cathleen is uncommonly improved within this year or two . When George last saw Cathleen , Cathleen was not very promising . George am very glad Elizabeth liked Cathleen . George hope Cathleen will turn out well . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth dare say Cathleen will ; Cathleen has got over the most trying age . ” 
 
  “ Did Elizabeth go by the village of Kympton ? ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth do not recollect that Elizabeth did . ” 
 
  “ M. GARDINER mention the village of Kympton , because the village of Kympton is the living which M. GARDINER ought to have had . the village of Kympton the village of Kympton would have suited M. GARDINER in every respect . ” 
 
  “ How should M. GARDINER have liked making sermons ? ” 
 
  “ Exceedingly well . M. GARDINER should have considered making as part of M. GARDINER duty , and the exertion would soon have been nothing . One ought not to repine;—but , to be sure , it would have been such a thing for M. GARDINER ! The quiet , the retirement of such a life would have answered all M. GARDINER ideas of happiness ! But such a life was not to be . Did Elizabeth ever hear Fitzwilliam mention the circumstance , when Elizabeth were in Kent ? ” 
 
  “ M. GARDINER have heard from authority , which M. GARDINER thought as good , that it was left Elizabeth conditionally only , and at the will of the present patron . ” 
 
  “ M. GARDINER have . Yes , there was something in that ; M. GARDINER told Elizabeth so from the first , George may remember . ” 
 
  “ George did hear , too , that there was a time , when sermon - making was not so palatable to M. GARDINER as sermon - making seems to be at present ; that M. GARDINER actually declared M. GARDINER resolution of never taking orders , and that the business had been compromised accordingly . ” 
 
  “ M. GARDINER did ! and declared was not wholly without foundation . George may remember what M. GARDINER told George on that point , when first we talked of that point . ” 
 
  They were now almost at the door of the house , for Elizabeth had walked fast to get rid of a most unexpected visitor ; and unwilling , for Elizabeth sake , to provoke a most unexpected visitor , Elizabeth only said in reply , with a good - humoured smile : 
 
  “ Come , Charlie , They are brother and sister , George know . Do not let They quarrel about the past . In future , Elizabeth hope They shall be always of one mind . ” 
 
  Elizabeth held out Elizabeth hand ; a most unexpected visitor kissed Elizabeth hand with affectionate gallantry , though a most unexpected visitor hardly knew how to look , and they entered the house . 
 Chapter 
 
  Charlie was so perfectly satisfied with this conversation that Charlie never again distressed Charlie , or provoked Charlie dear sister Elizabeth , by introducing the subject of this conversation ; and Charlie dear sister Elizabeth was pleased to find that Charlie dear sister Elizabeth had said enough to keep Charlie quiet . 
 
  The day of Charlie and Lydia ’s departure soon came , and Charlie dear sister Elizabeth was forced to submit to a separation , which , as Charlie dear sister Elizabeth husband by no means entered into Charlie dear sister Elizabeth scheme of their all going to Newcastle , was likely to continue at least a twelvemonth . 
 
  “ Oh ! Lydia ’s , ” Charlie dear sister Elizabeth cried , “ when shall Charlie and Lydia ’s meet again ? Lydia ’s 
 
  “ Oh , lord ! Lydia ’s do n’t know . Not these two or three years , perhaps . ” 
 
  “ Write to Charlie dear sister Elizabeth very often , Lydia ’s . ” 
 
  “ As often as Lydia ’s can . But you know married women have never much time for writing . Lydia ’s sisters may write to Lydia ’s . Lydia ’s sisters will have nothing else to do . ” 
 
  Charlie ’s adieus were much more affectionate than Charlie wife ’s . Charlie smiled , looked handsome , and said many pretty things . 
 
  “ Charlie is as fine a fellow , ” said Father , as soon as Charlie and Lydia ’s were out of the house , “ as ever Father saw . Charlie simpers , and smirks , and makes love to us all . Father am prodigiously proud of Charlie . Father defy even Sir William Lucas even Sir William Lucas to produce a more valuable son - in - law . ” 
 
  The loss of Charlie dear sister Elizabeth daughter made Charlie dear sister Elizabeth very dull for several days . 
 
  “ Charlie dear sister Elizabeth often think , ” said Charlie dear sister Elizabeth , “ that there is nothing so bad as parting with one ’s friends . One seems so forlorn without one ’s friends . ” 
 
  “ This is the consequence , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth see , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth , of marrying a daughter , ” said Charlie dear sister Elizabeth . “ marrying must make Charlie dear sister Elizabeth better satisfied that Charlie dear sister Elizabeth other four are single . ” 
 
  “ It is no such thing . Lydia ’s does not leave Charlie dear sister Elizabeth because Lydia ’s is married , but only because Charlie regiment happens to be so far off . If Charlie regiment had been nearer , Lydia ’s would not have gone so soon . ” 
 
  But the spiritless condition which this event threw Charlie dear sister Elizabeth into was shortly relieved , and Charlie dear sister Elizabeth mind opened again to the agitation of hope , by an article of news which then began to be in circulation . The housekeeper at Netherfield had received orders to prepare for the arrival of The housekeeper at Netherfield master , who was coming down in a day or two , to shoot there for several weeks . Mother was quite in the fidgets . Charlie dear sister Elizabeth looked at Jane , and smiled and shook Charlie dear sister Elizabeth head by turns . 
 
  “ Well , well , and so Charlie is coming down , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth , ” ( for Mrs. Phillips first brought Charlie dear sister Elizabeth the news ) . “ Well , so much the better . Not that Charlie dear sister Elizabeth care about it , though . Charlie is nothing to us , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth know , and Charlie dear sister Elizabeth am sure Charlie dear sister Elizabeth never want to see Charlie again . But , however , Charlie is very welcome to come to Netherfield , if Charlie likes come . And who knows what may happen ? But that is nothing to us . sister know , sister , us agreed long ago never to mention a word about it . And so , is it quite certain Charlie is coming ? ” 
 
  “ Charlie dear sister Elizabeth may depend on it , ” replied the other , “ for Mrs. Nicholls was in Meryton last night ; the other saw Mrs. Nicholls passing by , and went out the other on purpose to know the truth of it ; and Mrs. Nicholls told the other that it was certain true . Charlie comes down on Thursday at the latest , very likely on Wednesday . Mrs. Nicholls was going to the butcher ’s , Mrs. Nicholls told the other , on purpose to order in some meat on Wednesday , and Mrs. Nicholls has got three couple of ducks just fit to be killed . ” 
 
  Miss Bennet had not been able to hear of Charlie coming without changing colour . It was many months since Miss Bennet had mentioned Charlie name to Charlie dear sister Elizabeth ; but now , as soon as Both sisters were alone together , Miss Bennet said : 
 
  “ Miss Bennet saw Charlie dear sister Elizabeth look at Miss Bennet to - day , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth , when Miss Bennet aunt told us of the news ; and Miss Bennet know Miss Bennet appeared distressed . But do n’t imagine appeared was from any silly cause . Miss Bennet was only confused for the moment , because Miss Bennet felt that Miss Bennet should be looked at . Miss Bennet do assure Charlie dear sister Elizabeth that the news does not affect Miss Bennet either with pleasure or pain . Miss Bennet am glad of one thing , that Charlie comes alone ; because we shall see the less of Charlie . Not that Miss Bennet am afraid of Miss Bennet , but Miss Bennet dread other people ’s remarks . ” 
 
  Charlie dear sister Elizabeth did not know what to make of it . Had Charlie dear sister Elizabeth not seen Charlie in Derbyshire , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth might have supposed Charlie capable of coming there with no other view than what was acknowledged ; but Charlie dear sister Elizabeth still thought Charlie partial to Jane , and Charlie dear sister Elizabeth wavered as to the greater probability of Charlie coming there with Charlie friend ’s permission , or being bold enough to come without it . 
 
  “ Yet it is hard , ” Charlie dear sister Elizabeth sometimes thought , “ that Charlie can not come to a house which Charlie has legally hired , without raising all this speculation ! Charlie dear sister Elizabeth will leave Charlie to Charlie . ” 
 
  In spite of what Charlie dear sister Elizabeth sister declared , and really believed to be Charlie dear sister Elizabeth feelings in the expectation of Charlie coming , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth could easily perceive that Charlie dear sister Elizabeth spirits were affected by it . They were more disturbed , more unequal , than Charlie dear sister Elizabeth had often seen They . 
 
  The subject which had been so warmly canvassed between They parents , about a twelvemonth ago , was now brought forward again . 
 
  “ As soon as ever Charlie comes , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth dear , ” said Charlie dear sister Elizabeth , “ Charlie dear sister Elizabeth dear will wait on Charlie of course . ” 
 
  “ No , no . Charlie dear sister Elizabeth forced Charlie dear sister Elizabeth dear into visiting Charlie last year , and promised , if Charlie dear sister Elizabeth dear went to see Charlie , Charlie should marry one of Charlie dear sister Elizabeth dear daughters . But it ended in nothing , and Charlie dear sister Elizabeth dear will not be sent on a fool ’s errand again . ” 
 
  Charlie wife represented to Charlie how absolutely necessary such an attention would be from all the neighbouring gentlemen , on Charlie returning to Netherfield . 
 
  “ ’ Tis an etiquette Charlie despise , ” said Charlie . “ If Charlie wants our society , let Charlie seek our society . Charlie knows where we live . Charlie will not spend Charlie hours in running after Charlie neighbours every time Charlie neighbours go away and come back again . ” 
 
  “ Well , all Charlie dear sister Elizabeth know is , that it will be abominably rude if Charlie dear sister Elizabeth dear do not wait on Charlie . But , however , that sha n’t prevent Charlie dear sister Elizabeth asking Charlie to dine here , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth am determined . We must have Mrs. Long and the Gouldings soon . have will make thirteen with We , so there will be just room at table for Charlie . ” 
 
  Consoled by this resolution , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth was the better able to bear Charlie dear sister Elizabeth husband ’s incivility ; though it was very mortifying to know that Charlie dear sister Elizabeth neighbours might all see Charlie , in consequence of it , before Charlie dear sister Elizabeth neighbours did . As the day of Charlie arrival drew near , — 
 
  “ Jane begin to be sorry that Charlie comes at all , ” said Jane to Charlie dear sister Elizabeth . “ It would be nothing ; Jane could see Charlie with perfect indifference , but Jane can hardly bear to hear it thus perpetually talked of . Charlie dear sister Elizabeth means well ; but Charlie dear sister Elizabeth does not know , no one can know , how much Jane suffer from what Charlie dear sister Elizabeth says . Happy shall Charlie dear sister Elizabeth be , when Charlie stay at Netherfield is over ! ” 
 
  “ Charlie dear sister Elizabeth wish Charlie dear sister Elizabeth could say anything to comfort Charlie dear sister Elizabeth , ” replied Charlie dear sister Elizabeth ; “ but it is wholly out of Charlie dear sister Elizabeth power . Charlie dear sister Elizabeth must feel it ; and the usual satisfaction of preaching patience to a sufferer is denied Charlie dear sister Elizabeth , because Charlie dear sister Elizabeth have always so much . ” 
 
  Charlie arrived . Charlie dear sister Elizabeth , through the assistance of servants , contrived to have the earliest tidings of arrived , that the period of anxiety and fretfulness on Charlie dear sister Elizabeth side might be as long as it could . Charlie dear sister Elizabeth counted the days that must intervene before their invitation could be sent ; hopeless of seeing Charlie before . But on the third morning after Charlie arrival in Derbyshire , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth saw Charlie , from Charlie dear sister Elizabeth dressing - room window , enter the paddock and ride towards the house . 
 
  Charlie dear sister Elizabeth daughters were eagerly called to partake of Charlie dear sister Elizabeth joy . Jane resolutely kept Jane place at the table ; but Charlie dear sister Elizabeth , to satisfy Charlie dear sister Elizabeth mother , went to the window — Charlie dear sister Elizabeth looked,—she saw Fitzwilliam with Charlie , and sat down again by Jane . 
 
  “ There is a gentleman with Charlie , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth , ” said Kitty ; “ who can a gentleman with Charlie be ? ” 
 
  “ Some acquaintance or other , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth dear , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth suppose ; Charlie dear sister Elizabeth am sure Charlie dear sister Elizabeth do not know . ” 
 
  “ La ! ” replied Kitty , “ a gentleman with Charlie looks just like that man that used to be with Charlie before . Mr. what’s - that man that used to be with Charlie before - name . That tall , proud man . ” 
 
  “ Good gracious ! Fitzwilliam!—and so it does , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth vow . Well , any friend of Charlie will always be welcome here , to be sure ; but else Charlie dear sister Elizabeth must say that Charlie dear sister Elizabeth hate the very sight of a gentleman with Charlie . ” Jane Jane looked at Charlie dear sister Elizabeth with surprise and concern . Jane knew but little of Charlie and Lydia ’s meeting in Derbyshire , and therefore felt for the awkwardness which must attend Jane sister , in seeing Charlie almost for the first time after receiving Charlie explanatory letter . Both sisters were uncomfortable enough . Each felt for the other , and of course for Both sisters ; and Charlie dear sister Elizabeth talked on , of Charlie dear sister Elizabeth dislike of Fitzwilliam , and Charlie dear sister Elizabeth resolution to be civil to Fitzwilliam only as Charlie friend , without being heard by either of Both sisters . But Charlie dear sister Elizabeth had sources of uneasiness which could not be suspected by Jane , to whom Charlie dear sister Elizabeth had never yet had courage to shew Madeline ’s letter , or to relate Charlie dear sister Elizabeth own change of sentiment towards Fitzwilliam . To Jane , Fitzwilliam could be only a man whose proposals Jane had refused , and whose merit Jane had undervalued ; but to Charlie dear sister Elizabeth own more extensive information , Fitzwilliam was the person to whom the whole family were indebted for the first of benefits , and whom Charlie dear sister Elizabeth regarded Charlie dear sister Elizabeth with an interest , if not quite so tender , at least as reasonable and just as what Jane felt for Charlie . Jane astonishment at Fitzwilliam coming — at Fitzwilliam coming to Netherfield , to Longbourn , and voluntarily seeking Jane again , was almost equal to what Jane had known on first witnessing Fitzwilliam altered behaviour in Derbyshire . 
 
  The colour which had been driven from Jane face , returned for half a minute with an additional glow , and a smile of delight added lustre to Jane eyes , as Jane thought for that space of time that Fitzwilliam affection and wishes must still be unshaken . But Jane would not be secure . 
 
  “ Let Jane first see how Fitzwilliam behaves , ” said Jane ; “ it will then be early enough for expectation . ” 
 
  Jane sat intently at work , striving to be composed , and without daring to lift up Jane eyes , till anxious curiosity carried Jane eyes to the face of Jane sister as the servant was approaching the door . Jane looked a little paler than usual , but more sedate than Charlie dear sister Elizabeth had expected . On the gentlemen ’s appearing , Jane colour increased ; yet Jane received the gentlemen ’s with tolerable ease , and with a propriety of behaviour equally free from any symptom of resentment or any unnecessary complaisance . 
 
  Charlie dear sister Elizabeth said as little to either as civility would allow , and sat down again to Charlie dear sister Elizabeth work , with an eagerness which it did not often command . Charlie dear sister Elizabeth had ventured only one glance at Fitzwilliam . Fitzwilliam looked serious , as usual ; and , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth thought , more as Fitzwilliam had been used to look in Derbyshire , than as Charlie dear sister Elizabeth had seen Fitzwilliam at Pemberley . But , perhaps Fitzwilliam could not in Charlie dear sister Elizabeth presence be what Fitzwilliam was before Charlie dear sister Elizabeth uncle and aunt . It was a painful , but not an improbable , conjecture . 
 
  Charlie , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth had likewise seen for an instant , and in that short period saw Charlie looking both pleased and embarrassed . Charlie was received by Charlie dear sister Elizabeth with a degree of civility which made Charlie dear sister Elizabeth two daughters ashamed , especially when contrasted with the cold and ceremonious politeness of Charlie dear sister Elizabeth curtsey and address to Charlie friend ’s . 
 
  Elizabeth , particularly , who knew that Charlie dear sister Elizabeth mother owed to Charlie dear sister Elizabeth the preservation of Charlie dear sister Elizabeth favourite daughter from irremediable infamy , was hurt and distressed to a most painful degree by a distinction so ill applied . 
 
  Fitzwilliam , after enquiring of Charlie dear sister Elizabeth how Edward and Madeline did , a question which Charlie dear sister Elizabeth could not answer without confusion , said scarcely anything . Fitzwilliam was not seated by Charlie dear sister Elizabeth ; perhaps that was the reason of Fitzwilliam silence ; but it had not been so in Derbyshire . There Fitzwilliam had talked to Charlie dear sister Elizabeth friends , when Fitzwilliam could not to Charlie dear sister Elizabeth . But now several minutes elapsed without bringing the sound of Fitzwilliam voice ; and when occasionally , unable to resist the impulse of curiosity , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth raised Charlie dear sister Elizabeth eyes to Fitzwilliam face , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth as often found Fitzwilliam looking at Jane as at Charlie dear sister Elizabeth , and frequently on no object but the ground . More thoughtfulness and less anxiety to please , than when Charlie and Lydia ’s last met , were plainly expressed . Charlie dear sister Elizabeth was disappointed , and angry with Charlie dear sister Elizabeth for being so . 
 
  “ Could Charlie dear sister Elizabeth expect it to be otherwise ! ” said Charlie dear sister Elizabeth . “ Yet why did Fitzwilliam come ? ” 
 
  Charlie dear sister Elizabeth was in no humour for conversation with anyone but Fitzwilliam ; and to Fitzwilliam Charlie dear sister Elizabeth had hardly courage to speak . 
 
  Charlie dear sister Elizabeth enquired after Lydia ’s , but could do no more . 
 
  “ It is a long time , Charlie , since Charlie went away , ” said Charlie dear sister Elizabeth . 
 
  Charlie readily agreed to it . 
 
  “ Charlie dear sister Elizabeth began to be afraid Charlie would never come back again . People did say Charlie meant to quit the place entirely at Michaelmas ; but , however , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth hope meant is not true . A great many changes have happened in the neighbourhood , since Charlie went away . Lydia ’s is married and settled . And one of Charlie dear sister Elizabeth own daughters . Charlie dear sister Elizabeth suppose Charlie dear sister Elizabeth dear have heard of it ; indeed , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth dear must have seen it in the papers . It was in The Times and The Courier , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth dear know ; though it was not put in as it ought to be . It was only said , ‘ Lately , George , to Lydia ’s , ’ without there being a syllable said of Lydia ’s father , or the place where Lydia ’s lived , or anything . It was Charlie dear sister Elizabeth brother Gardiner ’s drawing up too , and Charlie dear sister Elizabeth wonder how Charlie dear sister Elizabeth brother Gardiner ’s came to make such an awkward business of it . Did Charlie see it ? ” 
 
  Charlie replied that Charlie did , and made Charlie congratulations . Charlie dear sister Elizabeth dared not lift up Charlie dear sister Elizabeth eyes . How Fitzwilliam looked , therefore , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth could not tell . 
 
  “ It is a delightful thing , to be sure , to have Charlie dear sister Elizabeth well married , ” continued Charlie dear sister Elizabeth mother , “ but at the same time , Charlie , it is very hard to have Lydia ’s taken such a way from Charlie dear sister Elizabeth . Charlie and Lydia ’s are gone down to Newcastle , a place quite northward , it seems , and there Charlie and Lydia ’s are to stay Charlie dear sister Elizabeth do not know how long . Fitzwilliam regiment is there ; for Charlie dear sister Elizabeth suppose Charlie dear sister Elizabeth dear have heard of Fitzwilliam leaving the — — shire , and of Fitzwilliam being gone into the regulars . Thank Heaven ! Fitzwilliam has some friends , though perhaps not so many as Fitzwilliam deserves . ” 
 
  Charlie dear sister Elizabeth , was in such misery of shame , that Charlie dear sister Elizabeth could hardly keep Charlie dear sister Elizabeth seat . It drew from Charlie dear sister Elizabeth , however , the exertion of speaking , which nothing else had so effectually done before ; and Charlie dear sister Elizabeth asked Charlie whether Charlie meant to make any stay in the country at present . A few weeks , Charlie believed . 
 
  “ When Charlie have killed all Charlie own birds , Charlie , ” said Charlie dear sister Elizabeth mother , “ Charlie dear sister Elizabeth beg Charlie will come here , and shoot as many as Charlie please on Father ’s manor . Charlie dear sister Elizabeth am sure Father will be vastly happy to oblige Charlie , and will save all the best of the covies for Charlie . ” 
 
  Charlie dear sister Elizabeth misery increased , at such unnecessary , such officious attention ! Were the same fair prospect to arise at present as had flattered them a year ago , every thing , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth was persuaded , would be hastening to the same vexatious conclusion . At that instant , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth felt that years of happiness could not make Jane or Charlie dear sister Elizabeth amends for moments of such painful confusion . 
 
  “ The first wish of Charlie dear sister Elizabeth heart , ” said Charlie dear sister Elizabeth to Charlie dear sister Elizabeth , “ is never more to be in company with either of them . them society can afford no pleasure that will atone for such wretchedness as this ! Let Charlie dear sister Elizabeth never see either one or the other again ! ” 
 
  Yet the misery , for which years of happiness were to offer no compensation , received soon afterwards material relief , from observing how much the beauty of Lydia ’s re - kindled the admiration of Jane former lover . When first Fitzwilliam came in , Fitzwilliam had spoken to Lydia ’s but little ; but every five minutes seemed to be giving Lydia ’s more of Fitzwilliam attention . Fitzwilliam found Lydia ’s as handsome as Lydia ’s had been last year ; as good natured , and as unaffected , though not quite so chatty . Jane was anxious that no difference should be perceived in Lydia ’s at all , and was really persuaded that Lydia ’s talked as much as ever . But Lydia ’s mind was so busily engaged , that Lydia ’s did not always know when Lydia ’s was silent . 
 
  When the gentlemen ’s rose to go away , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth was mindful of Charlie dear sister Elizabeth intended civility , and Charlie and Lydia ’s were invited and engaged to dine at Longbourn in a few days time . 
 
  “ Charlie are quite a visit in Charlie dear sister Elizabeth debt , Charlie , ” Charlie dear sister Elizabeth added , “ for when Charlie went to town last winter , Charlie promised to take a family dinner with us , as soon as Charlie returned . Charlie dear sister Elizabeth have not forgot , Charlie see ; and Charlie dear sister Elizabeth assure Charlie dear sister Elizabeth dear , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth was very much disappointed that Charlie did not come back and keep Charlie engagement . ” 
 
  Charlie looked a little silly at this reflection , and said something of Charlie concern at having been prevented by business . Charlie and Lydia ’s then went away . 
 
  Charlie dear sister Elizabeth had been strongly inclined to ask Charlie and Lydia ’s to stay and dine there that day ; but , though Charlie dear sister Elizabeth always kept a very good table , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth did not think anything less than two courses could be good enough for a man on whom Charlie dear sister Elizabeth had such anxious designs , or satisfy the appetite and pride of one who had ten thousand a year . 
 Chapter 
 
  As soon as the gentlemen were gone , Elizabeth walked out to recover Elizabeth spirits ; or in other words , to dwell without interruption on those subjects that must deaden them more . Fitzwilliam ’s behaviour astonished and vexed Elizabeth . 
 
  “ Why , if Fitzwilliam ’s came only to be silent , grave , and indifferent , ” said Elizabeth , “ did Fitzwilliam ’s come at all ? ” 
 
  Elizabeth could settle it in no way that gave Elizabeth pleasure . 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam ’s could be still amiable , still pleasing , to Elizabeth uncle and aunt , when Fitzwilliam ’s was in town ; and why not to Elizabeth ? If Fitzwilliam ’s fears Elizabeth , why come hither ? If Fitzwilliam ’s no longer cares for Elizabeth , why silent ? Teasing , teasing , man ! Elizabeth will think no more about Fitzwilliam ’s . ” 
 
  Elizabeth resolution was for a short time involuntarily kept by the approach of Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed better satisfied with their visitors , than Elizabeth . 
 
  “ Now , ” said Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed , “ that this first meeting is over , Elizabeth feel perfectly easy . Elizabeth know Elizabeth own strength , and Elizabeth shall never be embarrassed again by Fitzwilliam ’s coming . Elizabeth am glad Fitzwilliam ’s dines here on Tuesday . It will then be publicly seen that , on both sides , we meet only as common and indifferent acquaintance . ” 
 
  “ Yes , very indifferent indeed , ” said Elizabeth , laughingly . “ Oh , Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed , take care . Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed 
 
  “ Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed dear Elizabeth , Elizabeth can not think Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed so weak , as to be in danger now ? ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth think Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed are in very great danger of making Fitzwilliam ’s as much in love with Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed as ever . ” 
 
  They did not see the gentlemen again till Tuesday ; and Mother , in the meanwhile , was giving way to all the happy schemes , which the good humour and common politeness of Charles , in half an hour ’s visit , had revived . 
 
  On Tuesday there was a large party assembled at Longbourn ; and the two who were most anxiously expected , to the credit of the two who were most anxiously expected , to the credit of punctuality as sportsmen , were in very good time . When they repaired to the dining - room , Elizabeth eagerly watched to see whether Charles would take the place , which , in all their former parties , had belonged to Charles , by Elizabeth sister . Elizabeth prudent mother , occupied by the same ideas , forbore to invite Charles to sit by Mother . On entering the dining - room , Charles seemed to hesitate ; but Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed happened to look round , and happened to smile : it was decided . Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed placed Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed by Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed . Elizabeth Elizabeth , with a triumphant sensation , looked towards Charles . Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed bore it with noble indifference , and Elizabeth would have imagined that Charles had received Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed sanction to be happy , had Elizabeth not seen Charles eyes likewise turned towards Fitzwilliam ’s , with an expression of half - laughing alarm . 
 
  Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed behaviour to Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed was such , during dinner time , as showed an admiration of Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed , which , though more guarded than formerly , persuaded Elizabeth , that if left wholly to Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed , Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed happiness , and Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed own , would be speedily secured . Though Elizabeth dared not depend upon the consequence , Elizabeth yet received pleasure from observing Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed behaviour . Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed behaviour gave Elizabeth all the animation that Elizabeth spirits could boast ; for Elizabeth was in no cheerful humour . Fitzwilliam ’s was almost as far from Elizabeth as the table could divide them . Fitzwilliam ’s was on one side of Elizabeth mother . Elizabeth knew how little such a situation would give pleasure to either , or make either appear to advantage . Elizabeth was not near enough to hear any of their discourse , but Elizabeth could see how seldom their spoke to each other , and how formal and cold was their manner whenever their did . Elizabeth mother ’s ungraciousness , made the sense of what their owed Fitzwilliam ’s more painful to Elizabeth ’s mind ; and Elizabeth would , at times , have given anything to be privileged to tell Fitzwilliam ’s that Fitzwilliam ’s kindness was neither unknown nor unfelt by the whole of the family . 
 
  Elizabeth was in hopes that the evening would afford some opportunity of bringing their together ; that the whole of the visit would not pass away without enabling their to enter into something more of conversation than the mere ceremonious salutation attending Fitzwilliam ’s entrance . Anxious and uneasy , the period which passed in the dining - room , before the gentlemen came , was wearisome and dull to a degree that almost made Elizabeth uncivil . Elizabeth looked forward to the gentlemen entrance as the point on which all Elizabeth chance of pleasure for the evening must depend . 
 
  “ If Fitzwilliam ’s does not come to Elizabeth , then , ” said Elizabeth , “ Elizabeth shall give Fitzwilliam ’s up for ever . ” the gentlemen The gentlemen came ; and Elizabeth thought Fitzwilliam ’s looked as if Fitzwilliam ’s would have answered Elizabeth hopes ; but , alas ! the ladies had crowded round the table , where Miss Bennet was making tea , and Elizabeth pouring out the coffee , in so close a confederacy that there was not a single vacancy near Elizabeth which would admit of a chair . And on the gentlemen ’s approaching , one of the ladies moved closer to Elizabeth than ever , and said , in a whisper : 
 
  “ the gentlemen sha n’t come and part us , one of the ladies am determined . us want none of the gentlemen ; do us ? ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam ’s had walked away to another part of the dining - room . Elizabeth followed Fitzwilliam ’s with Elizabeth eyes , envied everyone to whom Fitzwilliam ’s spoke , had scarcely patience enough to help anybody to coffee ; and then was enraged against Elizabeth for being so silly ! 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam ’s How could Elizabeth ever be foolish enough to expect a renewal of Fitzwilliam ’s love ? Is there one among the sex , who would not protest against such a weakness as a second proposal to the same woman ? There is no indignity so abhorrent to their feelings ! ” 
 
  Elizabeth was a little revived , however , by Fitzwilliam ’s bringing back Fitzwilliam ’s coffee cup Fitzwilliam ’s ; and Elizabeth seized the opportunity of saying : 
 
  “ Is Fitzwilliam ’s sister at Pemberley still ? ” 
 
  “ Yes , Fitzwilliam ’s sister will remain there till Christmas . ” 
 
  “ And quite alone ? Have all Fitzwilliam ’s sister friends left Fitzwilliam ’s sister ? ” 
 
  “ Mrs. Annesley is with Fitzwilliam ’s sister . The others have been gone on to Scarborough , these three weeks . ” 
 
  Elizabeth could think of nothing more to say ; but if Fitzwilliam ’s wished to converse with Elizabeth , Fitzwilliam ’s might have better success . Fitzwilliam ’s stood by Elizabeth , however , for some minutes , in silence ; and , at last , on one of the ladies whispering to Elizabeth again , Fitzwilliam ’s walked away . 
 
  When the tea - things were removed , and the card - tables placed , the ladies all rose , and Elizabeth was then hoping to be soon joined by Fitzwilliam ’s , when all Elizabeth views were overthrown by seeing Fitzwilliam ’s fall a victim to Elizabeth mother ’s rapacity for whist players , and in a few moments after seated with the rest of the party . Elizabeth now lost every expectation of pleasure . their were confined for the evening at different tables , and Elizabeth had nothing to hope , but that Fitzwilliam ’s eyes were so often turned towards Elizabeth side of the room , as to make Fitzwilliam ’s play as unsuccessfully as Elizabeth . 
 
  Mother had designed to keep the two Netherfield gentlemen to supper ; but the two Netherfield gentlemen carriage was unluckily ordered before any of the others , and Mother had no opportunity of detaining the two Netherfield gentlemen . 
 
  “ Well the ladies , ” said Mother , as soon as the ladies were left to the ladies , “ What say Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed to the day ? Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed think every thing has passed off uncommonly well , Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed assure the ladies . The dinner was as well dressed as any Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed ever saw . The venison was roasted to a turn — and everybody said everybody never saw so fat a haunch . The soup was fifty times better than what we had at the Lucases ’ last week ; and Fitzwilliam ’s Fitzwilliam ’s acknowledged , that the partridges were remarkably well done ; and Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed suppose Fitzwilliam ’s has two or three French cooks at least . And , Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed , Mother never saw Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed look in greater beauty . Mrs. Annesley said so too , for Mother asked Mrs. Annesley whether Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed did not . And what do Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed think Mrs. Annesley said besides ? ‘ Ah ! Mother , we shall have Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed at Netherfield at last . ’ Mrs. Annesley did indeed . Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed do think Mrs. Annesley is as good a creature as ever lived — and Mrs. Annesley nieces are very pretty behaved girls , and not at all handsome : Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed like Mrs. Annesley nieces prodigiously . ” Mother Mother , in short , was in very great spirits ; Mother had seen enough of Charles ’s behaviour to Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed , to be convinced that Mother would get Charles at last ; and Mother expectations of advantage to Mother family , when in a happy humour , were so far beyond reason , that Mother was quite disappointed at not seeing Charles there again the next day , to make Charles proposals . 
 
  “ the day has been a very agreeable day , ” said Miss Bennet to Elizabeth . “ The party seemed so well selected , so suitable one with the other . Miss Bennet hope we may often meet again . ” 
 
  Elizabeth smiled . 
 
  “ Elizabeth , Elizabeth must not do so . Elizabeth must not suspect Elizabeth . It mortifies Elizabeth . Elizabeth assure Elizabeth that Elizabeth have now learnt to enjoy Fitzwilliam ’s conversation as an agreeable and sensible young man , without having a wish beyond it . Elizabeth am perfectly satisfied , from what Fitzwilliam ’s manners now are , that Fitzwilliam ’s never had any design of engaging Elizabeth affection . It is only that Fitzwilliam ’s is blessed with greater sweetness of address , and a stronger desire of generally pleasing , than any other man . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth are very cruel , ” said Elizabeth sister , “ Elizabeth will not let Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed smile , and are provoking Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed to smile every moment . ” 
 
  “ How hard it is in some cases to be believed ! ” 
 
  “ And how impossible in others ! ” 
 
  “ But why should Elizabeth wish to persuade Elizabeth that Elizabeth feel more than Elizabeth acknowledge ? ” 
 
  “ That is a question which Elizabeth hardly know how to answer . We all love to instruct , though We all can teach only what is not worth knowing . Forgive Elizabeth ; and if Elizabeth persist in indifference , do not make Elizabeth Elizabeth confidante . ” 
 Chapter 
 
  A few days after this visit , Charles called again , and alone . Charles friend had left Charles that morning for London , but was to return home in ten days time . Charles sat with the ladies above an hour , and was in remarkably good spirits . Mother invited Charles to dine with the ladies ; but , with many expressions of concern , Charles confessed Charles engaged elsewhere . 
 
  “ Next time Charles call , ” said Mother , “ Mother hope we shall be more lucky . ” 
 
  Charles should be particularly happy at any time , etc . etc . ; and if Mother would give Charles leave , would take an early opportunity of waiting on the ladies . 
 
  “ Can Charles come to - morrow ? ” 
 
  Yes , Charles had no engagement at all for to - morrow ; and Mother invitation was accepted with alacrity . 
 
  Charles came , and in such very good time that the ladies were none of the ladies dressed . In ran Mother to Mother daughter ’s room , in Mother dressing gown , and with Mother hair half finished , crying out : 
 
  “ Mother daughter ’s , make haste and hurry down . Charles is come — Charles is come . Charles is , indeed . Make haste , make haste . Here , Sarah , come to Miss Bennet this moment , and help Bennet on with Bennet gown . Never mind Miss Elizabeth ’s hair . ” 
 
  “ We will be down as soon as we can , ” said Mother daughter ’s ; “ but Mother daughter ’s dare say Kitty is forwarder than either of We , for Kitty went up stairs half an hour ago . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! hang Kitty ! what has Kitty to do with it ? Come be quick , be quick ! Where is Mother daughter ’s sash , Mother dear ? ” 
 
  But when Mother daughter ’s mother was gone , Mother daughter ’s would not be prevailed on to go down without one of Mother daughter ’s sisters . 
 
  The same anxiety to get the ladies by the ladies was visible again in the evening . After tea , Father retired to the library , as was Father custom , and Mary went up stairs to Mary instrument . Two obstacles of the ladies being thus removed , Mother sat looking and winking at Elizabeth ’s and Catherine for a considerable time , without making any impression on Elizabeth ’s and Catherine . Elizabeth ’s would not observe Mother ; and when at last Kitty did , Kitty very innocently said , “ What is the matter Mother ? What do Mother keep winking at Kitty for ? What am Kitty to do ? ” 
 
  “ Nothing Kitty , nothing . Mother did not wink at Kitty . ” Mother then sat still five minutes longer ; but unable to waste such a precious occasion , Mother suddenly got up , and saying to Kitty , “ Come here , Kitty , Mother want to speak to Kitty , ” took Kitty out of the room . Mother daughter ’s instantly gave a look at Elizabeth ’s which spoke Mother daughter ’s distress at such premeditation , and Mother daughter ’s entreaty that Elizabeth ’s would not give in to such premeditation . In a few minutes , Mother half - opened the door and called out : 
 
  “ Elizabeth ’s Mother dear , Mother want to speak with Elizabeth ’s . ” 
 
  Elizabeth ’s was forced to go . 
 
  “ We may as well leave Elizabeth ’s and Catherine by Elizabeth ’s and Catherine Elizabeth ’s know ; ” said Elizabeth ’s mother , as soon as Elizabeth ’s was in the hall . “ Kitty and Mother are going up stairs to sit in Mother dressing - room . ” 
 
  Elizabeth ’s made no attempt to reason with Elizabeth ’s mother , but remained quietly in the hall , till Elizabeth ’s and Kitty were out of sight , then returned into the drawing - room . 
 
  Mother ’s schemes for this day were ineffectual . Charles was every thing that was charming , except the professed lover of Mother daughter ’s . Charles ease and cheerfulness rendered Charles a most agreeable addition to their evening party ; and Charles bore with the ill - judged officiousness of the mother , and heard all Mother silly remarks with a forbearance and command of countenance particularly grateful to Mother daughter ’s . 
 
  Charles scarcely needed an invitation to stay supper ; and before Charles went away , an engagement was formed , chiefly through Charles own and Mother ’s means , for Charles coming next morning to shoot with Mother husband . 
 
  After this day , Mother daughter ’s said no more of Mother daughter ’s indifference . Not a word passed between the ladies concerning Charles ; but Elizabeth ’s went to bed in the happy belief that all must speedily be concluded , unless Fitzwilliam returned within the stated time . Seriously , however , Elizabeth ’s felt tolerably persuaded that all this must have taken place with Charles concurrence . 
 
  Charles was punctual to Charles appointment ; and Charles and Father spent the morning together , as had been agreed on . Charles was much more agreeable than Charles companion expected . There was nothing of presumption or folly in Charles that could provoke Charles ridicule , or disgust Charles into silence ; and Charles was more communicative , and less eccentric , than the other had ever seen Charles . Charles of course returned with Charles to dinner ; and in the evening Mother ’s invention was again at work to get every body away from Charles and Mother daughter ’s . Elizabeth ’s , went into the breakfast room for that purpose soon after tea ; for as the others were all going to sit down to cards , Elizabeth ’s could not be wanted to counteract Elizabeth ’s mother ’s schemes . 
 
  But on returning to the drawing - room , when Elizabeth ’s letter was finished , Elizabeth ’s saw , to Elizabeth ’s infinite surprise , there was reason to fear that Elizabeth ’s mother had been too ingenious for Elizabeth ’s . On opening the door , Elizabeth ’s perceived Mother daughter ’s and Charles standing together over the hearth , as if engaged in earnest conversation ; and had this led to no suspicion , the faces of Mother daughter ’s and Charles , as Mother daughter ’s and Charles hastily turned round and moved away from each other , would have told it all . Mother daughter ’s and Charles situation was awkward enough ; but Elizabeth ’s Elizabeth ’s thought was still worse . Not a syllable was uttered by either ; and Elizabeth ’s was on the point of going away again , when Charles , who as well as the other had sat down , suddenly rose , and whispering a few words to Mother daughter ’s , ran out of the room . 
 
  Mother daughter ’s could have no reserves from Elizabeth ’s ; and instantly embracing Elizabeth ’s , acknowledged , with the liveliest emotion , that Elizabeth ’s was the happiest creature in the world . 
 
  “ ’ Tis too much ! ” Mother daughter ’s added , “ by far too much . Mother daughter ’s do not deserve it . Oh ! why is not everybody as happy ? ” 
 
  Elizabeth ’s congratulations were given with a sincerity , a warmth , a delight , which words could but poorly express . Every sentence of kindness was a fresh source of happiness to Mother daughter ’s . But Mother daughter ’s would not allow Mother daughter ’s to stay with Mother daughter ’s sister , or say half that remained to be said for the present . 
 
  “ Mother daughter ’s must go instantly to Mother daughter ’s mother ; ” Mother daughter ’s cried . “ Mother daughter ’s would not on any account trifle with Mother affectionate solicitude ; or allow Mother to hear it from anyone but Mother daughter ’s . He is gone to Mother daughter ’s father already . Oh ! Elizabeth ’s , to know that what Mother daughter ’s have to relate will give such pleasure to all Mother daughter ’s dear family ! how shall Mother daughter ’s bear so much happiness ! ” 
 
  Mother daughter ’s then hastened away to Mother daughter ’s mother , who had purposely broken up the card party , and was sitting up stairs with Kitty . 
 
  Elizabeth ’s Elizabeth ’s , now smiled at the rapidity and ease with which an affair was finally settled , that had given them so many previous months of suspense and vexation . 
 
  “ And this , ” said Elizabeth ’s , “ is the end of all He friend ’s anxious circumspection ! of all He sister ’s falsehood and contrivance ! the happiest , wisest , most reasonable end ! ” 
 
  In a few minutes Elizabeth ’s was joined by Charles , whose conference with Elizabeth ’s father had been short and to the purpose . 
 
  “ Where is Elizabeth ’s sister ? ” said Charles hastily , as Charles opened the door . 
 
  “ With Charles mother up stairs . He sister ’s will be down in a moment , Charles dare say . ” 
 
  Charles then shut the door , and , coming up to Elizabeth ’s , claimed the good wishes and affection of a sister . Elizabeth ’s honestly and heartily expressed Elizabeth ’s delight in the prospect of their relationship . their shook hands with great cordiality ; and then , till He sister ’s came down , Elizabeth ’s had to listen to all Charles had to say of Charles own happiness , and of Mother daughter ’s perfections ; and in spite of Charles being a lover , Elizabeth ’s really believed all Charles expectations of felicity to be rationally founded , because all Charles expectations of felicity had for basis the excellent understanding , and super - excellent disposition of Mother daughter ’s , and a general similarity of feeling and taste between Mother daughter ’s and Charles . 
 
  It was an evening of no common delight to the ladies ; the satisfaction of Miss Bennet ’s mind gave a glow of such sweet animation to Bennet face , as made Bennet look handsomer than ever . Kitty simpered and smiled , and hoped Kitty turn was coming soon . Mother could not give Mother consent or speak Mother approbation in terms warm enough to satisfy Mother feelings , though Mother talked to Charles of nothing else for half an hour ; and when Father joined the ladies at supper , Father voice and manner plainly showed how really happy Father was . 
 
  Not a word , however , passed Father lips in allusion to it , till the ladies visitor took the ladies visitor leave for the night ; but as soon as the ladies visitor was gone , Father turned to Mother daughter ’s , and said : 
 
  “ Mother daughter ’s , Father congratulate Mother daughter ’s . Mother daughter ’s will be a very happy woman . ” 
 
  Mother daughter ’s went to Father instantly , kissed Father , and thanked Father for Father goodness . 
 
  “ Mother daughter ’s are a good girl ; ” Father replied , “ and Father have great pleasure in thinking Mother daughter ’s will be so happily settled . Father have not a doubt of Mother daughter ’s doing very well together . Mother daughter ’s tempers are by no means unlike . Mother daughter ’s are each of Mother daughter ’s so complying , that nothing will ever be resolved on ; so easy , that every servant will cheat Mother daughter ’s ; and so generous , that Mother daughter ’s will always exceed Mother daughter ’s income . ” 
 
  “ Father hope not so . Imprudence or thoughtlessness in money matters would be unpardonable in Father . ” 
 
  “ Exceed their income ! Mother dear Father , ” cried Father wife , “ what are Father talking of ? Why , Father has four or five thousand a year , and very likely more . ” Then addressing Mother daughter ’s , “ Oh ! Elizabeth ’s , Father wife am so happy ! Father wife am sure Father wife sha n’t get a wink of sleep all night . Father wife knew how it would be . Father wife always said it must be so , at last . Father wife was sure Mother daughter ’s could not be so beautiful for nothing ! Father wife remember , as soon as ever Father wife saw Charles , when Charles first came into Hertfordshire last year , Father wife thought how likely it was that Mother daughter ’s should come together . Oh ! Charles is the handsomest young man that ever was seen ! ” 
 
  George , Lydia , were all forgotten . Mother daughter ’s was beyond competition Father wife favourite child . At that moment , Mother daughter ’s cared for no other . Mother daughter ’s younger sisters soon began to make interest with Mother daughter ’s for objects of happiness which Mother daughter ’s might in future be able to dispense . 
 
  Mary petitioned for the use of the library at Netherfield ; and Kitty begged very hard for a few balls there every winter . 
 
  Charles , from this time , was of course a daily visitor at Longbourn ; coming frequently before breakfast , and always remaining till after supper ; unless when some barbarous neighbour , who could not be enough detested , had given Charles an invitation to dinner which Charles thought Charles obliged to accept . 
 
  Elizabeth ’s had now but little time for conversation with Elizabeth ’s sister ; for while Charles was present , Mother daughter ’s had no attention to bestow on anyone else ; but Mother daughter ’s found Mother daughter ’s considerably useful to Charles and Father in those hours of separation that must sometimes occur . In the absence of Mother daughter ’s , Charles always attached Charles to Elizabeth ’s , for the pleasure of talking of Elizabeth ’s ; and when Charles was gone , Mother daughter ’s constantly sought the same means of relief . 
 
  “ Charles has made Mother daughter ’s so happy , ” said Mother daughter ’s , one evening , “ by telling Mother daughter ’s that Charles was totally ignorant of Mother daughter ’s being in town last spring ! Mother daughter ’s had not believed it possible . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth ’s suspected as much , ” replied Elizabeth ’s . “ But how did Charles account for it ? ” 
 
  “ It must have been Charles sister ’s doing . They were certainly no friends to Charles acquaintance with Mother daughter ’s , which Elizabeth ’s can not wonder at , since Charles might have chosen so much more advantageously in many respects . But when they see , as Elizabeth ’s trust they will , that They brother is happy with Mother daughter ’s , they will learn to be contented , and their shall be on good terms again ; though their can never be what their once were to their . ” 
 
  “ That is the most unforgiving speech , ” said Elizabeth ’s , “ that Elizabeth ’s ever heard Mother daughter ’s utter . Good girl ! It would vex Elizabeth ’s , indeed , to see Mother daughter ’s again the dupe of Charles pretended regard . ” 
 
  “ Would Elizabeth ’s believe it , Elizabeth ’s , that when Charles went to town last November , Charles really loved Mother daughter ’s , and nothing but a persuasion of Mother daughter ’s being indifferent would have prevented Charles coming down again ! ” 
 
  “ Charles made a little mistake to be sure ; but it is to the credit of Charles modesty . ” 
 
  This naturally introduced a panegyric from Mother daughter ’s on Charles diffidence , and the little value Charles put on Charles own good qualities . Elizabeth ’s was pleased to find that Charles had not betrayed the interference of Charles friend ; for , though Mother daughter ’s had the most generous and forgiving heart in the world , Mother daughter ’s knew it was a circumstance which must prejudice Mother daughter ’s against Charles . 
 
  “ Mother daughter ’s am certainly the most fortunate creature that ever existed ! ” cried Mother daughter ’s . “ Oh ! Elizabeth ’s , why am Mother daughter ’s thus singled from Mother daughter ’s family , and blessed above Mother daughter ’s family ! If Mother daughter ’s could but see Elizabeth ’s as happy ! If there were but such another man for Elizabeth ’s ! ” 
 
  “ If Elizabeth ’s were to give Mother daughter ’s forty such men , Mother daughter ’s never could be so happy as Elizabeth ’s . Till Mother daughter ’s have Elizabeth ’s disposition , Elizabeth ’s goodness , Mother daughter ’s never can have Elizabeth ’s happiness . No , no , let Mother daughter ’s shift for Mother daughter ’s ; and , perhaps , if Mother daughter ’s have very good luck , Mother daughter ’s may meet with another William Collins in time . ” 
 
  The situation of affairs in the Longbourn family could not be long a secret . Mother was privileged to whisper The situation of affairs in the Longbourn family to Mrs. Phillips , and Mother ventured , without any permission , to do the same by all Mother neighbours in Meryton . 
 
  The Bennets were speedily pronounced to be the luckiest family in the world , though only a few weeks before , when Lydia had first run away , the Longbourn family had been generally proved to be marked out for misfortune . 
 Chapter 
 
  One morning , about a week after Charles ’s engagement with Jane had been formed , as Charles ’s and the females of the family were sitting together in the dining - room , Charles ’s and the females of the family attention was suddenly drawn to the window , by the sound of a carriage ; and Charles ’s and the females of the family perceived a chaise and four driving up the lawn . It was too early in the morning for visitors , and besides , the equipage did not answer to that of any of Charles ’s and the females of the family neighbours . The horses were post ; and neither a carriage , nor the livery of the servant who preceded a carriage , were familiar to Charles ’s and the females of the family . As it was certain , however , that Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor was coming , Charles ’s instantly prevailed on Miss Bennet to avoid the confinement of such an intrusion , and walk away with Charles ’s into the shrubbery . They both set off , and the conjectures of the females of the family continued , though with little satisfaction , till the door was thrown open and Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor entered . Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor was Cathleen . 
 
  Charles ’s and the females of the family were of course all intending to be surprised ; but Charles ’s and the females of the family astonishment was beyond Charles ’s and the females of the family expectation ; and on the part of Mother and Kitty , though Cathleen was perfectly unknown to Mother and Kitty , even inferior to what Elizabeth felt . 
 
  Cathleen entered the room with an air more than usually ungracious , made no other reply to Elizabeth ’s salutation than a slight inclination of the head , and sat down without saying a word . Elizabeth had mentioned Elizabeth name to Elizabeth mother on Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor entrance , though no request of introduction had been made . 
 
  Mother , all amazement , though flattered by having Cathleen , received Cathleen with the utmost politeness . After sitting for a moment in silence , Mother said very stiffly to Elizabeth , 
 
  “ Mother hope Elizabeth are well , Miss Bennet . Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor , Mother suppose , is Elizabeth mother . ” 
 
  Elizabeth replied very concisely that Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor was . 
 
  “ And that Elizabeth suppose is one of Mother sisters . ” 
 
  “ Yes , Elizabeth , ” said Mother , delighted to speak to Cathleen . “ Cathleen is Mother youngest girl but one . Mother youngest of all is lately married , and Mother eldest is somewhere about the grounds , walking with a young man who , Mother believe , will soon become a part of the family . ” 
 
  “ Mother have a very small park here , ” returned Cathleen after a short silence . 
 
  “ a very small park is nothing in comparison of Rosings , Cathleen lady , Cathleen dare say ; but Cathleen assure Mother a very small park is much larger than Sir William Lucas ’s . ” 
 
  “ This must be a most inconvenient sitting room for the evening , in summer ; the windows are full west . ” 
 
  Mother assured Elizabeth that they never sat there after dinner , and then added : 
 
  “ May Mother take the liberty of asking Elizabeth whether Elizabeth left Mr. and Mrs. Collins well . ” 
 
  “ Yes , very well . Elizabeth saw Mr. and Mrs. Collins the night before last . ” Elizabeth Elizabeth now expected that Mother would produce a letter for Elizabeth from Charlotte , as it seemed the only probable motive for Elizabeth calling . But no letter appeared , and Elizabeth was completely puzzled . 
 
  Mother , with great civility , begged Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor to take some refreshment ; but Cathleen very resolutely , and not very politely , declined eating anything ; and then , rising up , said to Elizabeth , 
 
  “ Miss Bennet , there seemed to be a prettyish kind of a little wilderness on one side of the lawn . Cathleen should be glad to take a turn in a prettyish kind of a little wilderness on one side of the lawn , if Elizabeth will favour Cathleen with Elizabeth company . ” 
 
  “ Go , Mother dear , ” cried Elizabeth mother , “ and show Elizabeth about the different walks . Mother think Elizabeth will be pleased with a prettyish kind of a little wilderness on one side of the lawn . ” 
 
  Elizabeth obeyed , and running into Elizabeth own room for Elizabeth parasol , attended Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor downstairs . As they passed through the hall , Cathleen opened the doors into the dining - parlour and drawing - room , and pronouncing the dining - parlour and drawing - room , after a short survey , to be decent looking rooms , walked on . 
 
  Cathleen carriage remained at the door , and Elizabeth saw that Elizabeth waiting - woman was in Cathleen carriage . They proceeded in silence along the gravel walk that led to the copse ; Elizabeth was determined to make no effort for conversation with Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor . 
 
  “ How could Elizabeth ever think Elizabeth like Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew ? ” said Elizabeth , as Elizabeth looked in Elizabeth face . 
 
  As soon as they entered the copse , Cathleen began in the following manner : — 
 
  “ Elizabeth can be at no loss , Miss Bennet , to understand the reason of Cathleen journey hither . Elizabeth own heart , Elizabeth own conscience , must tell Miss Bennet why Cathleen come . ” 
 
  Elizabeth looked with unaffected astonishment . 
 
  “ Indeed , Cathleen are mistaken , Cathleen . Elizabeth have not been at all able to account for the honour of seeing Miss Bennet here . ” 
 
  “ Miss Bennet , ” replied Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor , in an angry tone , “ Miss Bennet ought to know , that Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor am not to be trifled with . But however insincere Miss Bennet may choose to be , Miss Bennet shall not find Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor so . Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor character has ever been celebrated for Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor character sincerity and frankness , and in a cause of such moment as this , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor shall certainly not depart from Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor character . A report of a most alarming nature reached Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor two days ago . Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor was told that not only Cathleen was on the point of being most advantageously married , but that Elizabeth , that Miss Elizabeth , would , in all likelihood , be soon afterwards united to Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam . Though Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor know it must be a scandalous falsehood , though Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor would not injure Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam so much as to suppose the truth of it possible , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor instantly resolved on setting off for this place , that Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor might make Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor sentiments known to Miss Bennet . ” 
 
  “ If Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor believed it impossible to be true , ” said Elizabeth , colouring with astonishment and disdain , “ Elizabeth wonder Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor took the trouble of coming so far . What could Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor ladyship propose by it ? ” 
 
  “ At once to insist upon having such a report universally contradicted . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth coming to this place , to see Elizabeth and the family , ” said Elizabeth coolly , “ will be rather a confirmation of it ; if , indeed , such a report is in existence . ” 
 
  “ If ! Do you then pretend to be ignorant of such a report ? Has such a report not been industriously circulated by yourselves ? Do you not know that such a report is spread abroad ? ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth never heard that such a report was . ” 
 
  “ And can Elizabeth likewise declare , that there is no foundation for such a report ? ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth do not pretend to possess equal frankness with Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor . Miss Bennet may ask questions which Elizabeth shall not choose to answer . ” 
 
  “ This is not to be borne . Miss Bennet , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor insist on being satisfied . Has Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam , has Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam , made Miss Bennet an offer of marriage ? ” 
 
  “ Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor has declared an offer of marriage to be impossible . ” 
 
  “ an offer of marriage ought to be so ; an offer of marriage must be so , while Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam retains the use of Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam reason . But Miss Bennet arts and allurements may , in a moment of infatuation , have made Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam forget what Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam owes to Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam and to all Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam family . Miss Bennet may have drawn Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam in . ” 
 
  “ If Miss Bennet have , Miss Bennet shall be the last person to confess it . ” 
 
  “ Miss Bennet , do Miss Bennet know who Cathleen am ? Cathleen have not been accustomed to such language as this . Cathleen am almost the nearest relation Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam has in the world , and am entitled to know all Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam dearest concerns . ” 
 
  “ But Elizabeth are not entitled to know Miss Bennet ; nor will such behaviour as this , ever induce Cathleen to be explicit . ” 
 
  “ Let Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor be rightly understood . This match , to which Elizabeth have the presumption to aspire , can never take place . No , never . Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam is engaged to Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor daughter . Now what have Cathleen to say ? ” 
 
  “ Only this ; that if Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam is so , Cathleen can have no reason to suppose Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam will make an offer to Miss Bennet . ” 
 
  Cathleen hesitated for a moment , and then replied : 
 
  “ The engagement between them is of a peculiar kind . From them infancy , them have been intended for each other . It was the favourite wish of Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam mother , as well as of Cathleen . While in them cradles , we planned the union : and now , at the moment when the wishes of both sisters would be accomplished in both sisters marriage , to be prevented by Cathleen ! Do Elizabeth pay no regard to the wishes of Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam friends ? To Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam tacit engagement with Cathleen ? Are Elizabeth lost to every feeling of propriety and delicacy ? Have Elizabeth not heard Cathleen say that from Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam earliest hours Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam was destined for Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam cousin ? ” 
 
  “ Yes , and Elizabeth had heard it before . But what is that to Elizabeth ? If there is no other objection to Elizabeth marrying Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam , Elizabeth shall certainly not be kept from it by knowing that Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam mother and aunt wished Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam to marry Cathleen . Mother and Kitty did as much as Mother and Kitty could in planning the union . the union completion depended on others . If Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam is neither by honour nor inclination confined to Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam cousin , why is not Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam to make another choice ? And if Miss Bennet am another choice , why may not Miss Bennet accept Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam ? ” 
 
  “ Because honour , decorum , prudence , nay , interest , forbid accept . Yes , Miss Bennet , interest ; for do not expect to be noticed by Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam family or friends , if Elizabeth wilfully act against the inclinations of all . Elizabeth will be censured , slighted , and despised , by everyone connected with Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam . Miss Bennet alliance will be a disgrace ; Miss Bennet name will never even be mentioned by any of us . ” 
 
  “ These are heavy misfortunes , ” replied Elizabeth . “ But Cathleen must have such extraordinary sources of happiness necessarily attached to Cathleen situation , that Cathleen could , upon the whole , have no cause to repine . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor am ashamed of Elizabeth ! Is this Elizabeth gratitude for Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor attentions to Elizabeth last spring ? Is nothing due to Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor on that score ? Let they sit down . Elizabeth are to understand , Miss Bennet , that Elizabeth came here with the determined resolution of carrying Elizabeth purpose ; nor will Elizabeth be dissuaded from Elizabeth purpose . Elizabeth have not been used to submit to any person ’s whims . Elizabeth have not been in the habit of brooking disappointment . ” 
 
  “ That will make Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor situation at present more pitiable ; but That will have no effect on Elizabeth . ” 
 
  “ Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor will not be interrupted . Hear Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor in silence . Cathleen and Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam are formed for each other . Cathleen and Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam are descended , on the maternal side , from the same noble line ; and , on the father ’s , from respectable , honourable , and ancient — though untitled — families . Cathleen and Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam fortune on both sides is splendid . Cathleen and Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam are destined for each other by the voice of every member of Cathleen and Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam respective houses ; and what is to divide Cathleen and Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam ? The upstart pretensions of a young woman without family , connections , or fortune . Is The upstart pretensions of a young woman without family , connections , or fortune . to be endured ! But The upstart pretensions of a young woman without family , connections , or fortune . must not , shall not be . If Elizabeth were sensible of Elizabeth own good , Elizabeth would not wish to quit the sphere in which Elizabeth have been brought up . ” 
 
  “ In marrying Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Elizabeth should not consider Elizabeth as quitting the sphere in which Elizabeth have been brought up . Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam is a gentleman ; Elizabeth am a gentleman ’s daughter ; so far we are equal . ” 
 
  “ True . Elizabeth are a gentleman ’s daughter . But who was Elizabeth mother ? Who are Elizabeth uncles and aunts ? Do not imagine Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor ignorant of Elizabeth uncles and aunts condition . ” 
 
  “ Whatever Elizabeth connections may be , ” said Elizabeth , “ if Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew does not object to Elizabeth connections , Elizabeth connections can be nothing to Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor . ” 
 
  “ Tell Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor once for all , are Elizabeth engaged to Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam ? ” 
 
  Though Elizabeth would not , for the mere purpose of obliging Cathleen , have answered this question , Elizabeth could not but say , after a moment ’s deliberation : 
 
  “ Elizabeth am not . ” 
 
  Cathleen seemed pleased . 
 
  “ And will Elizabeth promise Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor , never to enter into such an engagement ? Elizabeth 
 
  “ Elizabeth will make no promise of the kind . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor am shocked and astonished . Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor expected to find a more reasonable young woman . But do not deceive Elizabeth into a belief that Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor will ever recede . Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor shall not go away till Elizabeth have given Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor the assurance Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor require . ” 
 
  “ And Elizabeth certainly never shall give the assurance Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor require . Elizabeth am not to be intimidated into anything so wholly unreasonable . Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor wants Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam to marry Cathleen ; but would Elizabeth giving Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor the assurance Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor require make them marriage at all more probable ? Supposing Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam to be attached to Elizabeth , would Elizabeth refusing to accept Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam hand make Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam wish to bestow Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam hand on Cathleen ? Allow Elizabeth to say , Cathleen , that the arguments with which Cathleen have supported this extraordinary application have been as frivolous as this extraordinary application was ill - judged . Cathleen have widely mistaken Elizabeth character , if Cathleen think Elizabeth can be worked on by such persuasions as these . How far Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam might approve of Cathleen interference in Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam affairs , Elizabeth can not tell ; but Cathleen have certainly no right to concern Cathleen in Miss Bennet . Elizabeth must beg , therefore , to be importuned no farther on the subject . ” 
 
  “ Not so hasty , if Elizabeth please . Elizabeth have by no means done . To all the objections Elizabeth have already urged , Elizabeth have still another to add . Elizabeth am no stranger to the particulars of Cathleen infamous elopement . Elizabeth know it all ; that Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam marrying Cathleen was a patched - up business , at the expence of Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor father and uncles . And is Cathleen to be Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam sister ? Is a young man who , Mother believe , will soon become a part of the family , to be Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam brother ? Heaven and earth!—of what are Elizabeth thinking ? Are the shades of Pemberley to be thus polluted ? ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth can now have nothing further to say , ” Elizabeth resentfully answered . “ Elizabeth have insulted Elizabeth in every possible method . Elizabeth must beg to return to the house . ” 
 
  And Elizabeth rose as Elizabeth spoke . Cathleen rose also , and they turned back . Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor was highly incensed . 
 
  “ Elizabeth have no regard , then , for the honour and credit of Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam ! Unfeeling , selfish girl ! Do Elizabeth not consider that a connection with Elizabeth must disgrace Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam in the eyes of everybody ? ” 
 
  “ Cathleen , Elizabeth have nothing further to say . Cathleen know Elizabeth sentiments . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth are then resolved to have Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam ? ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth have said no such thing . Elizabeth am only resolved to act in that manner , which will , in Elizabeth own opinion , constitute Elizabeth happiness , without reference to Cathleen , or to any person so wholly unconnected with Elizabeth . ” 
 
  “ It is well . Elizabeth refuse , then , to oblige Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor . Elizabeth refuse to obey the claims of duty , honour , and gratitude . Elizabeth are determined to ruin Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam in the opinion of all Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam friends , and make Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam the contempt of the world . ” 
 
  “ Neither duty , nor honour , nor gratitude , ” replied Elizabeth , “ have any possible claim on Elizabeth , in the present instance . No principle of either would be violated by Elizabeth marriage with Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam . And with regard to the resentment of the family , or the indignation of the world , if the former were excited by Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam marrying Elizabeth , it would not give Elizabeth one moment ’s concern — and the world in general would have too much sense to join in the scorn . ” 
 
  “ And this is Elizabeth real opinion ! This is Elizabeth final resolve ! Very well . Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor shall now know how to act . Do not imagine , Elizabeth , that Elizabeth ambition will ever be gratified . Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor came to try Elizabeth . Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor hoped to find Elizabeth reasonable ; but , depend upon it , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor will carry Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor point . ” 
 
  In this manner Cathleen talked on , till they were at the door of Cathleen carriage , when , turning hastily round , Cathleen added , “ Cathleen take no leave of Miss Bennet , Miss Bennet . Cathleen send no compliments to Miss Bennet mother . Miss Bennet deserve no such attention . Cathleen am most seriously displeased . ” 
 
  Elizabeth made no answer ; and without attempting to persuade Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor to return into the house , walked quietly into the house Elizabeth . Elizabeth heard Cathleen carriage drive away as Elizabeth proceeded up stairs . Elizabeth mother impatiently met Elizabeth at the door of the dressing - room , to ask why Cathleen would not come in again and rest Cathleen . 
 
  “ Cathleen did not choose it , ” said Elizabeth daughter , “ Cathleen would go . ” 
 
  “ Cathleen is a very fine - looking woman ! and Cathleen calling here was prodigiously civil ! for Cathleen only came , Elizabeth suppose , to tell us Mrs. Collins were well . Cathleen is on Cathleen road somewhere , Cathleen dare say , and so , passing through Meryton , thought Cathleen might as well call on Elizabeth . Elizabeth suppose Cathleen had nothing particular to say to Elizabeth , Elizabeth ? ” 
 
  Elizabeth was forced to give into a little falsehood here ; for to acknowledge the substance of they conversation was impossible . 
 Chapter 
 
  The discomposure of spirits which this extraordinary visit threw Elizabeth into , could not be easily overcome ; nor could Elizabeth , for many hours , learn to think of this extraordinary visit less than incessantly . Cathleen , it appeared , had actually taken the trouble of this journey from Rosings , for the sole purpose of breaking off Cathleen supposed engagement with Fitzwilliam . It was a rational scheme , to be sure ! but from what the report of their engagement could originate , Elizabeth was at a loss to imagine ; till Elizabeth recollected that Fitzwilliam being the intimate friend of Charles , and Cathleen being the sister of Jane , was enough , at a time when the expectation of one wedding made everybody eager for another , to supply the idea . Elizabeth had not Elizabeth forgotten to feel that the marriage of Elizabeth sister must bring them more frequently together . And Elizabeth neighbours at Lucas Lodge , therefore ( for through Elizabeth neighbours at Lucas Lodge communication with the Collinses , the report of their engagement , Elizabeth concluded , had reached Cathleen ) , had only set that down as almost certain and immediate , which Elizabeth had looked forward to as possible at some future time . 
 
  In revolving Cathleen ’s expressions , however , Elizabeth could not help feeling some uneasiness as to the possible consequence of Cathleen persisting in this interference . From what Cathleen had said of Cathleen resolution to prevent their marriage , it occurred to Elizabeth that Elizabeth must meditate an application to Elizabeth nephew ; and how Elizabeth nephew might take a similar representation of the evils attached to a connection with Elizabeth , Elizabeth dared not pronounce . Elizabeth knew not the exact degree of Elizabeth nephew affection for Elizabeth nephew aunt , or Elizabeth nephew dependence on Elizabeth judgment , but it was natural to suppose that Elizabeth nephew thought much higher of Elizabeth than Elizabeth could do ; and it was certain that , in enumerating the miseries of a marriage with one , whose immediate connections were so unequal to Elizabeth nephew own , Elizabeth would address Elizabeth nephew on Elizabeth nephew weakest side . With Elizabeth nephew notions of dignity , Elizabeth nephew would probably feel that the arguments , which to Elizabeth had appeared weak and ridiculous , contained much good sense and solid reasoning . 
 
  If Elizabeth nephew had been wavering before as to what Elizabeth nephew should do , which had often seemed likely , the advice and entreaty of so near a relation might settle every doubt , and determine Elizabeth nephew at once to be as happy as dignity unblemished could make Elizabeth nephew . In that case Elizabeth nephew would return no more . Cathleen might see Elizabeth nephew in Cathleen way through town ; and Elizabeth nephew engagement to Charles of coming again to Netherfield must give way . 
 
  “ If , therefore , an excuse for not keeping Elizabeth nephew promise should come to Elizabeth nephew friend within a few days , ” Elizabeth added , “ Elizabeth shall know how to understand an excuse for not keeping Elizabeth nephew promise . Elizabeth shall then give over every expectation , every wish of Elizabeth nephew constancy . If Elizabeth nephew is satisfied with only regretting Elizabeth , when Elizabeth nephew might have obtained Elizabeth affections and hand , Elizabeth shall soon cease to regret Elizabeth nephew at all . ” 
 
  The surprise of the rest of the family , on hearing who the rest of the family visitor had been , was very great ; but the rest of the family obligingly satisfied The surprise of the rest of the family , with the same kind of supposition which had appeased Cathleen curiosity ; and Elizabeth was spared from much teasing on the subject . 
 
  The next morning , as Elizabeth was going downstairs , Elizabeth was met by Elizabeth father , who came out of Elizabeth father , who came out of library with a letter in Elizabeth father , who came out of hand . 
 
  “ Elizabeth , ” said Elizabeth father , who came out of , “ Elizabeth father , who came out of was going to look for Elizabeth ; come into Elizabeth father , who came out of room . ” 
 
  Elizabeth followed Elizabeth father , who came out of thither ; and Elizabeth curiosity to know what Elizabeth father , who came out of had to tell Elizabeth was heightened by the supposition of its being in some manner connected with a letter in Elizabeth father , who came out of hand . It suddenly struck Elizabeth that a letter in Elizabeth father , who came out of hand might be from Cathleen ; and Elizabeth anticipated with dismay all the consequent explanations . 
 
  Elizabeth followed Elizabeth father , who came out of to the fire place , and they both sat down . Elizabeth father , who came out of then said , 
 
  “ Elizabeth father , who came out of have received a letter this morning that has astonished Elizabeth father , who came out of exceedingly . As Elizabeth father , who came out of letter principally concerns Elizabeth , Elizabeth ought to know Elizabeth father , who came out of letter contents . Elizabeth father , who came out of did not know before , that Elizabeth father , who came out of had two daughters on the brink of matrimony . Let Elizabeth father , who came out of congratulate Elizabeth on a very important conquest . ” 
 
  The colour now rushed into Elizabeth ’s cheeks in the instantaneous conviction of Elizabeth father , who came out of letter being a letter from Elizabeth nephew , instead of Cathleen ; and Elizabeth was undetermined whether most to be pleased that Elizabeth father , who came out of explained Elizabeth father , who came out of at all , or offended that Elizabeth father , who came out of letter was not rather addressed to Elizabeth ; when Elizabeth father , who came out of continued : 
 
  “ Elizabeth look conscious . Young ladies have great penetration in such matters as these ; but Elizabeth father , who came out of think Elizabeth father , who came out of may defy even Elizabeth sagacity , to discover the name of Elizabeth admirer . This letter is from William Collins . ” 
 
  “ From William Collins ! and what can William Collins have to say ? ” 
 
  “ Something very much to the purpose of course . Elizabeth father , who came out of begins with congratulations on the approaching nuptials of Elizabeth , of which , it seems , Elizabeth father , who came out of has been told by some of the good - natured , gossiping Lucases . Elizabeth father , who came out of shall not sport with Elizabeth impatience , by reading what Elizabeth father , who came out of says on that point . What relates to Elizabeth , is as follows : ‘ Having thus offered Elizabeth the sincere congratulations of the Collinses and Elizabeth father , who came out of on the approaching nuptials of Elizabeth , of which , it seems , Elizabeth father , who came out of has been told by some of the good - natured , gossiping Lucases , let Elizabeth father , who came out of now add a short hint on the subject of another ; of which we have been advertised by the same authority . Elizabeth daughter Elizabeth , it is presumed , will not long bear the name of Bennet , after Elizabeth elder sister has resigned the name of Bennet , and the chosen partner of Elizabeth fate may be reasonably looked up to as one of the most illustrious personages in this land . ’ 
 
  “ Can Elizabeth possibly guess , Elizabeth , who is meant by this ? ‘ the chosen partner of Elizabeth fate is blessed , in a peculiar way , with every thing the heart of mortal can most desire,—splendid property , noble kindred , and extensive patronage . Yet in spite of all these temptations , let Elizabeth father , who came out of warn Elizabeth father , who came out of cousin Elizabeth , and Elizabeth , of what evils Elizabeth father , who came out of cousin Elizabeth , and Elizabeth may incur by a precipitate closure with the chosen partner of Elizabeth fate proposals , which , of course , Elizabeth father , who came out of cousin Elizabeth , and Elizabeth will be inclined to take immediate advantage of . ’ 
 
  “ Have Elizabeth any idea , Elizabeth , who the chosen partner of Elizabeth fate is ? But now it comes out : 
 
  “ ‘ Elizabeth father , who came out of motive for cautioning Elizabeth is as follows . We have reason to imagine that the chosen partner of Elizabeth fate aunt , Cathleen , does not look on the match with a friendly eye . ’ 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam , Elizabeth see , is the man ! Now , Elizabeth , Elizabeth father , who came out of think Elizabeth father , who came out of have surprised Elizabeth . Could Fitzwilliam , or some of the good - natured , gossiping Lucases , have pitched on any man within the circle of our acquaintance , whose name would have given the lie more effectually to what they related ? Fitzwilliam , who never looks at any woman but to see a blemish , and who probably never looked at Elizabeth in Fitzwilliam life ! It is admirable ! ” 
 
  Elizabeth tried to join in Elizabeth father ’s pleasantry , but could only force one most reluctant smile . Never had Elizabeth father , who came out of wit been directed in a manner so little agreeable to Elizabeth . 
 
  “ Are Elizabeth not diverted ? ” 
 
  “ Oh ! yes . Pray read on . ” 
 
  “ ‘ After mentioning the likelihood of this marriage to Elizabeth last night , Elizabeth immediately , with Elizabeth usual condescension , expressed what Elizabeth felt on the occasion ; when it became apparent , that on the score of some family objections on the part of Elizabeth , Elizabeth would never give Elizabeth consent to what Elizabeth termed so disgraceful a match . Elizabeth father , who came out of thought it Elizabeth father , who came out of duty to give the speediest intelligence of this to Elizabeth father , who came out of cousin , that Elizabeth and Elizabeth admirer may be aware of what Elizabeth and Elizabeth admirer are about , and not run hastily into a marriage which has not been properly sanctioned . ’ William Collins moreover adds , ‘ William Collins am truly rejoiced that William Collins cousin Lydia ’s sad business has been so well hushed up , and am only concerned that Elizabeth and Elizabeth admirer living together before their marriage took place should be so generally known . William Collins must not , however , neglect the duties of William Collins station , or refrain from declaring William Collins amazement at hearing that Elizabeth received the young couple into Elizabeth house as soon as the young couple were married . received was an encouragement of vice ; and had William Collins been the rector of Longbourn , William Collins should very strenuously have opposed received . Elizabeth ought certainly to forgive the young couple , as a Christian , but never to admit the young couple in Elizabeth sight , or allow the young couple names to be mentioned in Elizabeth hearing . ’ That is William Collins notion of Christian forgiveness ! The rest of William Collins letter is only about William Collins dear Charlotte ’s situation , and William Collins expectation of a young olive - branch . But , Elizabeth , Elizabeth look as if Elizabeth did not enjoy it . Elizabeth are not going to be missish , Elizabeth father , who came out of hope , and pretend to be affronted at an idle report . For what do we live , but to make sport for our neighbours , and laugh at our neighbours in our turn ? ” 
 
  “ Oh ! ” cried Elizabeth , “ Elizabeth am excessively diverted . But it is so strange ! ” 
 
  “ Yes — that is what makes it amusing . Had the young couple fixed on any other man it would have been nothing ; but Fitzwilliam perfect indifference , and Elizabeth pointed dislike , make it so delightfully absurd ! Much as Elizabeth father , who came out of abominate writing , Elizabeth father , who came out of would not give up William Collins ’s correspondence for any consideration . Nay , when Elizabeth father , who came out of read a letter of William Collins , Elizabeth father , who came out of can not help giving William Collins the preference even over Fitzwilliam , much as Elizabeth father , who came out of value the impudence and hypocrisy of Fitzwilliam . And pray , Elizabeth , what said Cathleen about the report of their engagement ? Did Cathleen call to refuse Cathleen consent ? ” 
 
  To this question Elizabeth replied only with a laugh ; and as it had been asked without the least suspicion , Elizabeth was not distressed by Elizabeth father , who came out of repeating it . Elizabeth had never been more at a loss to make Elizabeth feelings appear what Elizabeth feelings were not . It was necessary to laugh , when Elizabeth would rather have cried . Elizabeth father , who came out of had most cruelly mortified Elizabeth , by what Elizabeth father , who came out of said of Fitzwilliam ’s indifference , and Elizabeth could do nothing but wonder at such a want of penetration , or fear that perhaps , instead of Fitzwilliam seeing too little , Elizabeth might have fancied too much . 
 Chapter 
 
  Instead of receiving any such letter of excuse from Charles friend , as Elizabeth half expected Charles to do , Charles was able to bring Fitzwilliam with Charles to Longbourn before many days had passed after Cathleen ’s visit . The gentlemen arrived early ; and , before Mother had time to tell Charles of The gentlemen having seen Mother aunt , of which Elizabeth sat in momentary dread , Charles , who wanted to be alone with Jane , proposed The gentlemen walking out . proposed was agreed to . Mother was not in the habit of walking ; Mary could never spare time ; but The gentlemen set off together . Charles and Jane , however , soon allowed The gentlemen to outstrip Charles and Jane . Charles and Jane lagged behind , while Elizabeth , Kitty , and Fitzwilliam were to entertain each other . Very little was said by either ; Kitty was too much afraid of Kitty to talk ; Elizabeth was secretly forming a desperate resolution ; and perhaps Fitzwilliam might be doing the same . 
 
  They walked towards the Lucases , because Kitty wished to call upon Maria ; and as Elizabeth saw no occasion for making it a general concern , when Kitty left They Elizabeth went boldly on with Kitty alone . Now was the moment for Elizabeth resolution to be executed , and , while Elizabeth courage was high , Elizabeth immediately said : 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam , Elizabeth am a very selfish creature ; and , for the sake of giving relief to Elizabeth own feelings , care not how much Elizabeth may be wounding Fitzwilliam . Elizabeth can no longer help thanking Fitzwilliam for Fitzwilliam unexampled kindness to Maria . Ever since Elizabeth have known Fitzwilliam unexampled kindness to Maria , Elizabeth have been most anxious to acknowledge to Fitzwilliam how gratefully Elizabeth feel Fitzwilliam unexampled kindness to Maria . Were it known to the rest of Elizabeth family , Elizabeth should not have merely Elizabeth own gratitude to express . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam am sorry , exceedingly sorry , ” replied Fitzwilliam , in a tone of surprise and emotion , “ that Elizabeth have ever been informed of what may , in a mistaken light , have given Elizabeth uneasiness . Fitzwilliam did not think Madeline was so little to be trusted . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam must not blame Madeline . Madeline thoughtlessness first betrayed to Elizabeth that Fitzwilliam had been concerned in the matter ; and , of course , Elizabeth could not rest till Elizabeth knew the particulars . Let Elizabeth thank Fitzwilliam again and again , in the name of all Elizabeth family , for that generous compassion which induced Elizabeth to take so much trouble , and bear so many mortifications , for the sake of discovering so many mortifications . ” 
 
  “ If Elizabeth will thank Fitzwilliam , ” Fitzwilliam replied , “ let it be for Elizabeth alone . That the wish of giving happiness to Elizabeth might add force to the other inducements which led Fitzwilliam on , Fitzwilliam shall not attempt to deny . But Elizabeth family owe Fitzwilliam nothing . Much as Fitzwilliam respect Elizabeth family , Fitzwilliam believe Fitzwilliam thought only of Elizabeth . ” 
 
  Elizabeth was too much embarrassed to say a word . After a short pause , Fitzwilliam added , “ Elizabeth are too generous to trifle with Fitzwilliam . If Elizabeth feelings are still what Elizabeth feelings were last April , tell Fitzwilliam so at once . Fitzwilliam affections and wishes are unchanged , but one word from Elizabeth will silence Fitzwilliam on this subject for ever . ” 
 
  Elizabeth , feeling all the more than common awkwardness and anxiety of Fitzwilliam situation , now forced Elizabeth to speak ; and immediately , though not very fluently , gave Fitzwilliam to understand that Elizabeth sentiments had undergone so material a change , since the period to which Fitzwilliam alluded , as to make Elizabeth receive with gratitude and pleasure Fitzwilliam present assurances . The happiness which this reply produced , was such as Fitzwilliam had probably never felt before ; and Fitzwilliam expressed Fitzwilliam on the occasion as sensibly and as warmly as a man violently in love can be supposed to do . Had Elizabeth been able to encounter Fitzwilliam eye , Elizabeth might have seen how well the expression of heartfelt delight , diffused over Fitzwilliam face , became Fitzwilliam ; but , though Elizabeth could not look , Elizabeth could listen , and Fitzwilliam told Elizabeth of feelings , which , in proving of what importance Elizabeth was to Fitzwilliam , made Fitzwilliam affection every moment more valuable . 
 
  They walked on , without knowing in what direction . There was too much to be thought , and felt , and said , for attention to any other objects . Elizabeth soon learnt that they were indebted for They present good understanding to the efforts of Fitzwilliam aunt , who did call on Fitzwilliam in her ladyship ’s return through London , and there relate her ladyship ’s journey to Longbourn , her ladyship ’s journey to Longbourn motive , and the substance of her ladyship ’s conversation with Elizabeth ; dwelling emphatically on every expression of Elizabeth which , in her ladyship ’s apprehension , peculiarly denoted her ladyship ’s perverseness and assurance ; in the belief that such a relation must assist her ladyship ’s endeavours to obtain that promise from her ladyship ’s nephew which her ladyship ’s had refused to give . But , unluckily for her ladyship ’s , her ladyship ’s journey to Longbourn effect had been exactly contrariwise . 
 
  “ her ladyship ’s journey to Longbourn taught Elizabeth to hope , ” said Fitzwilliam , “ as Elizabeth had scarcely ever allowed Elizabeth to hope before . Elizabeth knew enough of Elizabeth disposition to be certain that , had Elizabeth been absolutely , irrevocably decided against Elizabeth , Elizabeth would have acknowledged decided to Cathleen ’s , frankly and openly . ” 
 
  Elizabeth coloured and laughed as Elizabeth replied , “ Yes , Fitzwilliam know enough of Elizabeth frankness to believe Elizabeth capable of that . After abusing Elizabeth so abominably to Elizabeth face , Elizabeth could have no scruple in abusing Elizabeth to all Elizabeth relations . ” 
 
  “ What did Elizabeth say of Elizabeth , that Elizabeth did not deserve ? For , though Elizabeth accusations were ill - founded , formed on mistaken premises , Elizabeth behaviour to Elizabeth at the time had merited the severest reproof . Elizabeth behaviour to Elizabeth at the time was unpardonable . Elizabeth can not think of Elizabeth behaviour to Elizabeth at the time without abhorrence . ” 
 
  “ We will not quarrel for the greater share of blame annexed to that evening , ” said Elizabeth . “ The conduct of neither , if strictly examined , will be irreproachable ; but since then , we have both , Elizabeth hope , improved in civility . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth can not be so easily reconciled to Elizabeth . The recollection of what Elizabeth then said , of Elizabeth conduct , Elizabeth manners , Elizabeth expressions during the whole of it , is now , and has been many months , inexpressibly painful to Elizabeth . Elizabeth reproof , so well applied , Elizabeth shall never forget : ‘ had Elizabeth behaved in a more gentlemanlike manner . ’ Those were Elizabeth words . Fitzwilliam know not , Fitzwilliam can scarcely conceive , how Elizabeth words have tortured me;—though it was some time , Elizabeth confess , before Elizabeth was reasonable enough to allow Elizabeth words justice . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth was certainly very far from expecting Elizabeth words to make so strong an impression . Elizabeth had not the smallest idea of Elizabeth words being ever felt in such a way . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam can easily believe it . Elizabeth thought Elizabeth then devoid of every proper feeling , Fitzwilliam am sure Elizabeth did . The turn of Elizabeth countenance Elizabeth shall never forget , as Elizabeth said that Elizabeth could not have addressed Elizabeth in any possible way that would induce Elizabeth to accept Elizabeth . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! do not repeat what Elizabeth then said . These recollections will not do at all . Elizabeth assure Fitzwilliam that Elizabeth have long been most heartily ashamed of These recollections . ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam mentioned Fitzwilliam letter . “ Did Fitzwilliam letter , ” said Fitzwilliam , “ did Fitzwilliam letter soon make Elizabeth think better of Fitzwilliam ? Did Elizabeth , on reading Fitzwilliam letter , give any credit to Fitzwilliam letter contents ? ” 
 
  Elizabeth explained what Fitzwilliam letter effect on Elizabeth had been , and how gradually all Elizabeth former prejudices had been removed . 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam knew , ” said Fitzwilliam , “ that what Fitzwilliam wrote must give Elizabeth pain , but Fitzwilliam letter was necessary . Fitzwilliam hope Elizabeth have destroyed Fitzwilliam letter . There was one part especially , the opening of Fitzwilliam letter , which Fitzwilliam should dread Elizabeth having the power of reading again . Fitzwilliam can remember some expressions which might justly make Elizabeth hate Fitzwilliam . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam letter shall certainly be burnt , if Elizabeth believe Fitzwilliam letter essential to the preservation of Fitzwilliam regard ; but , though we have both reason to think Fitzwilliam opinions not entirely unalterable , Fitzwilliam opinions are not , Fitzwilliam hope , quite so easily changed as are implies . ” 
 
  “ When Fitzwilliam wrote Fitzwilliam letter , ” replied Fitzwilliam , “ Fitzwilliam believed Fitzwilliam perfectly calm and cool , but Fitzwilliam am since convinced that Fitzwilliam letter was written in a dreadful bitterness of spirit . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam letter , perhaps , began in bitterness , but Fitzwilliam letter did not end so . The adieu is charity itself . But think no more of Fitzwilliam letter . The feelings of the person who wrote , and the person who received Fitzwilliam letter , are now so widely different from what The feelings of the person who wrote , and the person who received Fitzwilliam letter were then , that every unpleasant circumstance attending Fitzwilliam letter ought to be forgotten . Elizabeth must learn some of Fitzwilliam philosophy . Think only of the past as the past remembrance gives Elizabeth pleasure . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam can not give Elizabeth credit for any philosophy of the kind . Elizabeth retrospections must be so totally void of reproach , that the contentment arising from Elizabeth retrospections is not of philosophy , but , what is much better , of innocence . But with Fitzwilliam , it is not so . Painful recollections will intrude which can not , which ought not , to be repelled . Fitzwilliam have been a selfish being all Fitzwilliam life , in practice , though not in principle . As a child Fitzwilliam was taught what was right , but Fitzwilliam was not taught to correct Fitzwilliam temper . Fitzwilliam was given good principles , but left to follow good principles in pride and conceit . Unfortunately an only son ( for many years an only child ) , Fitzwilliam was spoilt by Fitzwilliam parents , who , though good Fitzwilliam parents , who , though good ( Fitzwilliam father , particularly , all that was benevolent and amiable ) , allowed , encouraged , almost taught Fitzwilliam to be selfish and overbearing ; to care for none beyond Fitzwilliam own family circle ; to think meanly of all the rest of the world ; to wish at least to think meanly of all the rest of the world sense and worth compared with Fitzwilliam own . Such Fitzwilliam was , from eight to eight and twenty ; and such Fitzwilliam might still have been but for Elizabeth , dearest , loveliest Elizabeth ! What do Fitzwilliam not owe Elizabeth ! Elizabeth taught Fitzwilliam a lesson , hard indeed at first , but most advantageous . By Elizabeth , Fitzwilliam was properly humbled . Fitzwilliam came to Elizabeth without a doubt of Fitzwilliam reception . Elizabeth showed Fitzwilliam how insufficient were all Fitzwilliam pretensions to please a woman worthy of being pleased . ” 
 
  “ Had Elizabeth then persuaded Elizabeth that Elizabeth should ? ” 
 
  “ Indeed Elizabeth had . What will Elizabeth think of Elizabeth vanity ? Elizabeth believed Elizabeth to be wishing , expecting Elizabeth addresses . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth manners must have been in fault , but not intentionally , Elizabeth assure Elizabeth . Elizabeth never meant to deceive Elizabeth , but Elizabeth spirits might often lead Elizabeth wrong . How Elizabeth must have hated Fitzwilliam after that evening ? ” 
 
  “ Hate Fitzwilliam ! Elizabeth was angry perhaps at first , but Elizabeth anger soon began to take a proper direction . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth am almost afraid of asking what Elizabeth thought of Elizabeth , when They met at Pemberley . Elizabeth blamed Elizabeth for coming ? ” 
 
  “ No indeed ; Elizabeth felt nothing but surprise . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth surprise could not be greater than Elizabeth in being noticed by Elizabeth . Elizabeth conscience told Elizabeth that Elizabeth deserved no extraordinary politeness , and Elizabeth confess that Elizabeth did not expect to receive more than Elizabeth due . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam object then , ” replied Fitzwilliam , “ was to show Elizabeth , by every civility in Fitzwilliam power , that Fitzwilliam was not so mean as to resent the past ; and Fitzwilliam hoped to obtain Elizabeth forgiveness , to lessen Elizabeth ill opinion , by letting Elizabeth see that Elizabeth reproofs had been attended to . How soon any other wishes introduced any other wishes Fitzwilliam can hardly tell , but Fitzwilliam believe in about half an hour after Fitzwilliam had seen Elizabeth . ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam then told Elizabeth of Georgiana ’s delight in Georgiana ’s acquaintance , and of Georgiana ’s disappointment at Georgiana ’s acquaintance sudden interruption ; which naturally leading to the cause of Georgiana ’s acquaintance sudden interruption , Georgiana ’s soon learnt that Fitzwilliam resolution of following Georgiana ’s from Derbyshire in quest of Georgiana ’s sister had been formed before Fitzwilliam quitted the inn , and that Fitzwilliam gravity and thoughtfulness there had arisen from no other struggles than what such a purpose must comprehend . 
 
  Elizabeth expressed Elizabeth gratitude again , but it was too painful a subject to each , to be dwelt on farther . 
 
  After walking several miles in a leisurely manner , and too busy to know anything about it , they found at last , on examining They watches , that it was time to be at home . 
 
  “ What could become of Charles and Jane ! ” was a wonder which introduced the discussion of Charles and Jane affairs . Fitzwilliam was delighted with Charles and Jane engagement ; Fitzwilliam friend had given Fitzwilliam the earliest information of Charles and Jane engagement . 
 
  “ Elizabeth must ask whether Fitzwilliam were surprised ? ” said Elizabeth . 
 
  “ Not at all . When Fitzwilliam went away , Fitzwilliam felt that Charles and Jane engagement would soon happen . ” 
 
  “ That is to say , Fitzwilliam had given Fitzwilliam permission . Elizabeth guessed as much . ” And though Fitzwilliam exclaimed at the term , Elizabeth found that it had been pretty much the case . 
 
  “ On the evening before Fitzwilliam going to London , ” said Fitzwilliam , “ Fitzwilliam made a confession to Charles , which Fitzwilliam believe Fitzwilliam ought to have made long ago . Fitzwilliam told Charles of all that had occurred to make Fitzwilliam former interference in Charles affairs absurd and impertinent . Charles surprise was great . Charles had never had the slightest suspicion . Fitzwilliam told Charles , moreover , that Fitzwilliam believed Fitzwilliam mistaken in supposing , as Fitzwilliam had done , that Elizabeth sister was indifferent to Charles ; and as Fitzwilliam could easily perceive that Charles attachment to Jane was unabated , Fitzwilliam felt no doubt of Charles and Jane happiness together . ” 
 
  Elizabeth could not help smiling at Fitzwilliam easy manner of directing Elizabeth . 
 
  “ Did Fitzwilliam speak from Fitzwilliam own observation , ” said Elizabeth , “ when Fitzwilliam told Charles that Jane loved Charles , or merely from Elizabeth information last spring ? ” 
 
  “ From the former . Fitzwilliam had narrowly observed Jane during the two visits which Fitzwilliam had lately made here ; and Fitzwilliam was convinced of Jane affection . ” 
 
  “ And Fitzwilliam assurance of Jane affection , Elizabeth suppose , carried immediate conviction to Charles . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam assurance of Jane affection did . Charles is most unaffectedly modest . Charles diffidence had prevented Charles depending on Charles own judgment in so anxious a case , but Charles reliance on Fitzwilliam made every thing easy . Fitzwilliam was obliged to confess one thing , which for a time , and not unjustly , offended Charles . Fitzwilliam could not allow Fitzwilliam to conceal that Elizabeth sister had been in town three months last winter , that Fitzwilliam had known been , and purposely kept been from Charles . Charles was angry . But Charles anger , Fitzwilliam am persuaded , lasted no longer than Charles remained in any doubt of Elizabeth sister ’s sentiments . Charles has heartily forgiven Fitzwilliam now . ” 
 
  Elizabeth longed to observe that Charles had been a most delightful friend ; so easily guided that Charles worth was invaluable ; but Elizabeth checked Elizabeth . Elizabeth remembered that Charles had yet to learn to be laughed at , and it was rather too early to begin . In anticipating the happiness of Charles , which of course was to be inferior only to Fitzwilliam own , Fitzwilliam continued the conversation till they reached the house . In the hall they parted . 
 Chapter 
 
  “ Jane dear Elizabeth , where can Jane dear Elizabeth have been walking to ? ” was a question which Jane dear Elizabeth received from Jane as soon as Jane dear Elizabeth entered their room , and from all the others when their sat down to table . Jane dear Elizabeth had only to say in reply , that their had wandered about , till Jane dear Elizabeth was beyond Jane dear Elizabeth own knowledge . Jane dear Elizabeth coloured as Jane dear Elizabeth spoke ; but neither coloured , nor anything else , awakened a suspicion of the truth . 
 
  The evening passed quietly , unmarked by anything extraordinary . The acknowledged lovers talked and laughed , the unacknowledged were silent . Fitzwilliam was not of a disposition in which happiness overflows in mirth ; and Jane dear Elizabeth , agitated and confused , rather knew that Jane dear Elizabeth was happy than felt Jane dear Elizabeth to be so ; for , besides the immediate embarrassment , there were other evils before Jane dear Elizabeth . Jane dear Elizabeth anticipated what would be felt in the family when Jane dear Elizabeth situation became known ; Jane dear Elizabeth was aware that no one liked Fitzwilliam but Jane ; and even feared that with the others it was a dislike which not all Fitzwilliam fortune and consequence might do away . 
 
  At night Jane dear Elizabeth opened Jane dear Elizabeth heart to Jane . Though suspicion was very far from Miss Bennet ’s general habits , Miss Bennet ’s was absolutely incredulous here . 
 
  “ Jane dear Elizabeth are joking , Jane dear Elizabeth . This can not be!—engaged to Fitzwilliam ! No , no , Jane dear Elizabeth shall not deceive Miss Bennet ’s . Miss Bennet ’s know This to be impossible . ” 
 
  “ This is a wretched beginning indeed ! Jane dear Elizabeth sole dependence was on Jane ; and Jane dear Elizabeth am sure nobody else will believe Jane dear Elizabeth , if Jane do not . Yet , indeed , Jane dear Elizabeth am in earnest . Jane dear Elizabeth speak nothing but the truth . Fitzwilliam still loves Jane dear Elizabeth , and their are engaged . ” 
 
  Jane looked at Jane dear Elizabeth doubtingly . “ Oh , Jane dear Elizabeth ! it can not be . Miss Bennet ’s know how much Jane dear Elizabeth dislike Fitzwilliam . ” 
 
  “ Miss Bennet ’s know nothing of the matter . That is all to be forgot . Perhaps Jane dear Elizabeth did not always love Fitzwilliam so well as Jane dear Elizabeth do now . But in such cases as these , a good memory is unpardonable . This is the last time Jane dear Elizabeth shall ever remember it Jane dear Elizabeth . ” Miss Bennet ’s Miss Bennet ’s still looked all amazement . Jane dear Elizabeth again , and more seriously assured Miss Bennet ’s of its truth . 
 
  “ Good Heaven ! can it be really so ! Yet now Jane must believe Jane dear Elizabeth , ” cried Jane . “ Jane dear Elizabeth , Miss Bennet ’s would — Miss Bennet ’s do congratulate Jane dear Elizabeth — but are Jane dear Elizabeth certain ? forgive the question — are Jane dear Elizabeth quite certain that Jane dear Elizabeth can be happy with Fitzwilliam ? ” 
 
  “ There can be no doubt of be . It is settled between their already , that their are to be the happiest couple in the world . But are Jane pleased , Jane ? Shall Jane like to have such a brother ? ” 
 
  “ Very , very much . Nothing could give either Fitzwilliam or Jane more delight . But we considered it , we talked of it as impossible . And do Jane dear Elizabeth really love Fitzwilliam quite well enough ? Oh , Jane dear Elizabeth ! do anything rather than marry without affection . Are Jane dear Elizabeth quite sure that Jane dear Elizabeth feel what Jane dear Elizabeth ought to do ? ” 
 
  “ Oh , yes ! Miss Bennet ’s will only think Jane dear Elizabeth feel more than Jane dear Elizabeth ought to do , when Jane dear Elizabeth tell Miss Bennet ’s all . ” 
 
  “ What do Jane dear Elizabeth mean ? ” 
 
  “ Why , Jane dear Elizabeth must confess that Jane dear Elizabeth love Fitzwilliam better than Jane dear Elizabeth do Fitzwilliam . Jane dear Elizabeth am afraid Miss Bennet ’s will be angry . ” 
 
  “ Jane dear Elizabeth , now be serious . Miss Bennet ’s want to talk very seriously . Let Miss Bennet ’s know every thing that Miss Bennet ’s am to know , without delay . Will Jane dear Elizabeth tell Miss Bennet ’s how long Jane dear Elizabeth have loved Fitzwilliam ? ” 
 
  “ loved has been coming on so gradually , that Jane dear Elizabeth hardly know when loved began . But Jane dear Elizabeth believe Jane dear Elizabeth must date loved from Jane dear Elizabeth first seeing Fitzwilliam beautiful grounds at Pemberley . ” 
 
  Another entreaty that Jane dear Elizabeth would be serious , however , produced the desired effect ; and Jane dear Elizabeth soon satisfied Jane by Jane dear Elizabeth solemn assurances of attachment . When convinced on that article , Miss Bennet ’s had nothing further to wish . 
 
  “ Now Miss Bennet ’s am quite happy , ” said Miss Bennet ’s , “ for Jane dear Elizabeth will be as happy as Miss Bennet ’s . Miss Bennet ’s always had a value for Fitzwilliam . Were it for nothing but Fitzwilliam love of Jane dear Elizabeth , Miss Bennet ’s must always have esteemed Fitzwilliam ; but now , as Fitzwilliam friend and Jane dear Elizabeth husband , there can be only Charles and Jane dear Elizabeth more dear to Miss Bennet ’s . But Jane dear Elizabeth , Jane dear Elizabeth have been very sly , very reserved with Miss Bennet ’s . How little did Jane dear Elizabeth tell Miss Bennet ’s of what passed at Pemberley and Lambton ! Miss Bennet ’s owe all that Miss Bennet ’s know of it to another , not to Jane dear Elizabeth . ” 
 
  Jane dear Elizabeth told Miss Bennet ’s the motives of Jane dear Elizabeth secrecy . Jane dear Elizabeth had been unwilling to mention Fitzwilliam ; and the unsettled state of Jane dear Elizabeth own feelings had made Jane dear Elizabeth equally avoid the name of Fitzwilliam friend . But now Jane dear Elizabeth would no longer conceal from Miss Bennet ’s Fitzwilliam share in Lydia ’s marriage . All was acknowledged , and half the night spent in conversation . 
 
  “ Good gracious ! ” cried Miss Bennet ’s , as Miss Bennet ’s stood at a window the next morning , “ if that disagreeable Fitzwilliam is not coming here again with our dear Charles ! What can Fitzwilliam mean by being so tiresome as to be always coming here ? Miss Bennet ’s had no notion but Fitzwilliam would go a - shooting , or something or other , and not disturb our with Fitzwilliam company . What shall our do with Fitzwilliam ? Jane dear Elizabeth , Jane dear Elizabeth must walk out with Fitzwilliam again , that Fitzwilliam may not be in Fitzwilliam way . ” 
 
  Jane dear Elizabeth could hardly help laughing at so convenient a proposal ; yet was really vexed that Miss Bennet ’s should be always giving Fitzwilliam such an epithet . 
 
  As soon as they entered , Fitzwilliam looked at Jane dear Elizabeth so expressively , and shook hands with such warmth , as left no doubt of Fitzwilliam good information ; and Fitzwilliam soon afterwards said aloud , “ Miss Bennet ’s , have Miss Bennet ’s no more lanes hereabouts in which Jane dear Elizabeth may lose Jane dear Elizabeth way again to - day ? ” 
 
  “ Miss Bennet ’s advise Fitzwilliam , and Jane dear Elizabeth , and Kitty , ” said Miss Bennet ’s , “ to walk to Oakham Mount this morning . walk is a nice long walk , and Fitzwilliam has never seen the view . ” 
 
  “ walk may do very well for Fitzwilliam , and Jane dear Elizabeth , and Kitty , ” replied Fitzwilliam ; “ but Fitzwilliam am sure walk will be too much for Kitty . Wo n’t it , Kitty ? ” Kitty owned that Kitty had rather stay at home . Fitzwilliam professed a great curiosity to see the view from Oakham Mount , and Jane dear Elizabeth silently consented . As Jane dear Elizabeth went up stairs to get ready , Miss Bennet ’s followed Jane dear Elizabeth , saying : 
 
  “ Miss Bennet ’s am quite sorry , Jane dear Elizabeth , that Jane dear Elizabeth should be forced to have Fitzwilliam all to Jane dear Elizabeth . But Miss Bennet ’s hope Jane dear Elizabeth will not mind have : it is all for Jane ’s sake , Jane dear Elizabeth know ; and there is no occasion for talking to Fitzwilliam , except just now and then . So , do not put Jane dear Elizabeth to inconvenience . ” 
 
  During their walk , it was resolved that Father ’s consent should be asked in the course of the evening . Jane dear Elizabeth reserved to Jane dear Elizabeth the application for Miss Bennet ’s . Jane dear Elizabeth could not determine how Jane dear Elizabeth mother would take the application for Miss Bennet ’s ; sometimes doubting whether all Fitzwilliam wealth and grandeur would be enough to overcome Miss Bennet ’s abhorrence of Fitzwilliam . But whether Jane dear Elizabeth were violently set against the match , or violently delighted with the match , it was certain that Jane dear Elizabeth manner would be equally ill adapted to do credit to Jane dear Elizabeth sense ; and Jane dear Elizabeth could no more bear that Fitzwilliam should hear the first raptures of Jane dear Elizabeth joy , than the first vehemence of Jane dear Elizabeth disapprobation . 
 
  In the evening , soon after Father ’s withdrew to the library , Jane dear Elizabeth saw Fitzwilliam rise also and follow Father ’s , and Jane dear Elizabeth agitation on seeing it was extreme . Jane dear Elizabeth did not fear Jane dear Elizabeth father ’s opposition , but Father ’s was going to be made unhappy ; and that it should be through Jane dear Elizabeth means — that Jane dear Elizabeth , should be distressing Father ’s by Jane dear Elizabeth choice , should be filling Father ’s with fears and regrets in disposing of Jane dear Elizabeth — was a wretched reflection , and Jane dear Elizabeth sat in misery till Fitzwilliam appeared again , when , looking at Fitzwilliam , Jane dear Elizabeth was a little relieved by Fitzwilliam smile . In a few minutes Fitzwilliam approached the table where Jane dear Elizabeth was sitting with Kitty ; and , while pretending to admire Jane dear Elizabeth work said in a whisper , “ Go to Jane dear Elizabeth father , Father ’s wants Jane dear Elizabeth in the library . ” Jane dear Elizabeth was gone directly . 
 
  Father ’s was walking about the room , looking grave and anxious . “ Jane dear Elizabeth , ” said Father ’s , “ what are Jane dear Elizabeth doing ? Are Jane dear Elizabeth out of Jane dear Elizabeth senses , to be accepting Fitzwilliam ? Have not Jane dear Elizabeth always hated Fitzwilliam ? ” 
 
  How earnestly did Jane dear Elizabeth then wish that Jane dear Elizabeth former opinions had been more reasonable , Jane dear Elizabeth expressions more moderate ! It would have spared Jane dear Elizabeth from explanations and professions which it was exceedingly awkward to give ; but explanations and professions which it was exceedingly awkward to give were now necessary , and Jane dear Elizabeth assured Father ’s , with some confusion , of Jane dear Elizabeth attachment to Fitzwilliam . 
 
  “ Or , in other words , Jane dear Elizabeth are determined to have Fitzwilliam . Fitzwilliam is rich , to be sure , and Jane dear Elizabeth may have more fine clothes and fine carriages than Jane . But will more fine clothes and fine carriages make Jane dear Elizabeth happy ? ” 
 
  “ Have Father ’s any other objection , ” said Jane dear Elizabeth , “ than Father ’s belief of Jane dear Elizabeth indifference ? ” 
 
  “ None at all . We all know Fitzwilliam to be a proud , unpleasant sort of man ; but this would be nothing if Jane dear Elizabeth really liked Fitzwilliam . ” 
 
  “ Jane dear Elizabeth do , Jane dear Elizabeth do like Fitzwilliam , ” Jane dear Elizabeth replied , with tears in Jane dear Elizabeth eyes , “ Jane dear Elizabeth love Fitzwilliam . Indeed Fitzwilliam has no improper pride . Fitzwilliam is perfectly amiable . Father ’s do not know what Fitzwilliam really is ; then pray do not pain Jane dear Elizabeth by speaking of Fitzwilliam in such terms . ” 
 
  “ Jane dear Elizabeth , ” said Father ’s , “ Father ’s have given Fitzwilliam Father ’s consent . Fitzwilliam is the kind of man , indeed , to whom Father ’s should never dare refuse anything , which Fitzwilliam condescended to ask . Father ’s now give it to Jane dear Elizabeth , if Jane dear Elizabeth are resolved on having Fitzwilliam . But let Father ’s advise Jane dear Elizabeth to think better of it . Father ’s know Jane dear Elizabeth disposition , Jane dear Elizabeth . Father ’s know that Jane dear Elizabeth could be neither happy nor respectable , unless Jane dear Elizabeth truly esteemed Fitzwilliam ; unless Jane dear Elizabeth looked up to Fitzwilliam as a superior . Jane dear Elizabeth lively talents would place Jane dear Elizabeth in the greatest danger in an unequal marriage . Jane dear Elizabeth could scarcely escape discredit and misery . Jane dear Elizabeth , let Father ’s not have the grief of seeing Jane dear Elizabeth unable to respect Jane dear Elizabeth partner in life . Jane dear Elizabeth know not what Jane dear Elizabeth are about . ” 
 
  Jane dear Elizabeth , was earnest and solemn in Jane dear Elizabeth reply ; and at length , by repeated assurances that Fitzwilliam was really the object of Jane dear Elizabeth choice , by explaining the gradual change which Jane dear Elizabeth estimation of Fitzwilliam had undergone , relating Jane dear Elizabeth absolute certainty that Fitzwilliam affection was not the work of a day , but had stood the test of many months ’ suspense , and enumerating with energy all Fitzwilliam good qualities , Jane dear Elizabeth did conquer Jane dear Elizabeth father ’s incredulity , and reconcile Father ’s to the match . 
 
  “ Well , Father ’s dear , ” said Father ’s , when Jane dear Elizabeth ceased speaking , “ Father ’s have no more to say . If this be the case , Fitzwilliam deserves Jane dear Elizabeth . Father ’s could not have parted with Jane dear Elizabeth , Jane dear Elizabeth , to anyone less worthy . ” 
 
  To complete the favourable impression , Jane dear Elizabeth then told Father ’s what Fitzwilliam had voluntarily done for Lydia ’s . Father ’s heard Jane dear Elizabeth with astonishment . 
 
  “ This is an evening of wonders , indeed ! And so , Fitzwilliam did every thing ; made up the match , gave the money , paid Fitzwilliam debts , and got Fitzwilliam Fitzwilliam commission ! So much the better . It will save Father ’s a world of trouble and economy . Had it been Jane dear Elizabeth uncle ’s doing , Father ’s must and would have paid Jane dear Elizabeth uncle ’s ; but these violent young lovers carry every thing these violent young lovers own way . Father ’s shall offer to pay Fitzwilliam to - morrow ; Fitzwilliam will rant and storm about Fitzwilliam love for Jane dear Elizabeth , and there will be an end of the matter . ” 
 
  Father ’s then recollected Jane dear Elizabeth embarrassment a few days before , on Father ’s reading William Collins ’s letter ; and after laughing at Jane dear Elizabeth some time , allowed Jane dear Elizabeth at last to go — saying , as Miss Bennet ’s quitted the room , “ If any young men come for Mary or Kitty , send any young men in , for Miss Bennet ’s am quite at leisure . ” 
 
  Jane dear Elizabeth mind was now relieved from a very heavy weight ; and , after half an hour ’s quiet reflection in Jane dear Elizabeth own room , Jane dear Elizabeth was able to join the others with tolerable composure . Every thing was too recent for gaiety , but the evening passed tranquilly away ; there was no longer anything material to be dreaded , and the comfort of ease and familiarity would come in time . 
 
  When Miss Bennet ’s went up to Miss Bennet ’s dressing - room at night , Jane dear Elizabeth followed Miss Bennet ’s , and made the important communication . the important communication effect was most extraordinary ; for on first hearing the important communication , Miss Bennet ’s sat quite still , and unable to utter a syllable . Nor was it under many , many minutes that Miss Bennet ’s could comprehend what Miss Bennet ’s heard ; though not in general backward to credit what was for the advantage of the family , or that came in the shape of a lover to any of the family . Miss Bennet ’s began at length to recover , to fidget about in Miss Bennet ’s chair , get up , sit down again , wonder , and bless Miss Bennet ’s . 
 
  “ Good gracious ! Father ’s bless Miss Bennet ’s ! only think ! dear Miss Bennet ’s ! Fitzwilliam ! Who would have thought it ! And is it really true ? Oh ! Jane dear Elizabeth ! how rich and how great Jane dear Elizabeth will be ! What pin - money , what jewels , what carriages Jane dear Elizabeth will have ! Jane ’s is nothing to it — nothing at all . Miss Bennet ’s am so pleased — so happy . Such a charming man!—so handsome ! so tall!—Oh , Miss Bennet ’s dear Elizabeth ! pray apologise for Miss Bennet ’s having disliked Fitzwilliam so much before . Miss Bennet ’s hope Fitzwilliam will overlook disliked . Jane dear Elizabeth A house in town ! Every thing that is charming ! Three daughters married ! Ten thousand a year ! Oh , Lord ! What will become of Jane dear Elizabeth . Jane dear Elizabeth shall go distracted . ” 
 
  This was enough to prove that Miss Bennet ’s approbation need not be doubted : and Jane dear Elizabeth , rejoicing that such an effusion was heard only by Jane dear Elizabeth , soon went away . But before Jane dear Elizabeth had been three minutes in Jane dear Elizabeth own room , Jane dear Elizabeth mother followed Jane dear Elizabeth . 
 
  “ Jane dear Elizabeth , ” Miss Bennet ’s cried , “ Miss Bennet ’s can think of nothing else ! Ten thousand a year , and very likely more ! ’ Tis as good as a Lord ! And a special licence . Jane dear Elizabeth must and shall be married by a special licence . But Jane dear Elizabeth , tell Miss Bennet ’s what dish Fitzwilliam is particularly fond of , that Miss Bennet ’s may have it to - morrow . ” 
 
  This was a sad omen of what Jane dear Elizabeth mother ’s behaviour to Fitzwilliam might be ; and Jane dear Elizabeth found that , though in the certain possession of Fitzwilliam warmest affection , and secure of Jane dear Elizabeth relations ’ consent , there was still something to be wished for . But the morrow passed off much better than Jane dear Elizabeth expected ; for Miss Bennet ’s luckily stood in such awe of Fitzwilliam that Miss Bennet ’s ventured not to speak to Fitzwilliam , unless it was in Miss Bennet ’s power to offer Fitzwilliam any attention , or mark Miss Bennet ’s deference for Fitzwilliam opinion . 
 
  Jane dear Elizabeth had the satisfaction of seeing Jane dear Elizabeth father taking pains to get acquainted with Fitzwilliam ; and Father ’s soon assured Jane dear Elizabeth that Father ’s was rising every hour in Father ’s esteem . 
 
  “ Father ’s admire all Father ’s three sons - in - law highly , ” said Father ’s . “ Fitzwilliam , perhaps , is Father ’s favourite ; but Father ’s think Father ’s shall like Fitzwilliam quite as well as Jane ’s . ” 
 Chapter 
 
  Elizabeth ’s spirits soon rising to playfulness again , Elizabeth ’s wanted Fitzwilliam to account for Fitzwilliam having ever fallen in love with Elizabeth ’s . “ How could Fitzwilliam begin ? ” said Elizabeth ’s . “ Elizabeth ’s can comprehend Fitzwilliam going on charmingly , when Fitzwilliam had once made a beginning ; but what could set Fitzwilliam off in the first place ? ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam can not fix on the hour , or the spot , or the look , or the words , which laid the foundation . It is too long ago . Fitzwilliam was in the middle before Fitzwilliam knew that Fitzwilliam had begun . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam beauty Fitzwilliam had early withstood , and as for Fitzwilliam manners — Fitzwilliam behaviour to Fitzwilliam was at least always bordering on the uncivil , and Fitzwilliam never spoke to Fitzwilliam without rather wishing to give Fitzwilliam pain than not . Now be sincere ; did Fitzwilliam admire Fitzwilliam for Fitzwilliam impertinence ? ” 
 
  “ For the liveliness of Elizabeth ’s mind , Fitzwilliam did . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam may as well call Fitzwilliam impertinence impertinence at once . Fitzwilliam impertinence was very little less . The fact is , that Fitzwilliam were sick of civility , of deference , of officious attention . Fitzwilliam were disgusted with the women who were always speaking , and looking , and thinking for Fitzwilliam approbation alone . Fitzwilliam roused , and interested Fitzwilliam , because Fitzwilliam was so unlike the women who were always speaking , and looking , and thinking for Fitzwilliam approbation alone . Had Fitzwilliam not been really amiable , Fitzwilliam would have hated Fitzwilliam for it ; but in spite of the pains Fitzwilliam took to disguise Fitzwilliam , Fitzwilliam feelings were always noble and just ; and in Fitzwilliam heart , Fitzwilliam thoroughly despised the persons who so assiduously courted Fitzwilliam . There — Fitzwilliam have saved Fitzwilliam the trouble of accounting for it ; and really , all things considered , Fitzwilliam begin to think it perfectly reasonable . To be sure , Fitzwilliam knew no actual good of Fitzwilliam — but nobody thinks of that when nobody fall in love . ” 
 
  “ Was there no good in Fitzwilliam affectionate behaviour to Jane while Jane was ill at Netherfield ? ” 
 
  “ Dearest Jane ! who could have done less for Jane ? But make a virtue of it by all means . Fitzwilliam good qualities are under Fitzwilliam protection , and Fitzwilliam are to exaggerate Fitzwilliam good qualities as much as possible ; and , in return , it belongs to Fitzwilliam to find occasions for teasing and quarrelling with Fitzwilliam as often as may be ; and Fitzwilliam shall begin directly by asking Fitzwilliam what made Fitzwilliam so unwilling to come to the point at last . What made Fitzwilliam so shy of Fitzwilliam , when Fitzwilliam first called , and afterwards dined here ? Why , especially , when Fitzwilliam called , did Fitzwilliam look as if Fitzwilliam did not care about Fitzwilliam ? ” 
 
  “ Because Fitzwilliam were grave and silent , and gave Fitzwilliam no encouragement . ” 
 
  “ But Fitzwilliam was embarrassed . ” 
 
  “ And so was I. ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam might have talked to Fitzwilliam more when Fitzwilliam came to dinner . ” 
 
  “ A man who had felt less , might . ” 
 
  “ How unlucky that Fitzwilliam should have a reasonable answer to give , and that Fitzwilliam should be so reasonable as to admit it ! But Fitzwilliam wonder how long Fitzwilliam would have gone on , if Fitzwilliam had been left to Fitzwilliam . Fitzwilliam wonder when Fitzwilliam would have spoken , if Fitzwilliam had not asked Fitzwilliam ! Fitzwilliam resolution of thanking Fitzwilliam for Fitzwilliam kindness to Lydia had certainly great effect . Too much , Fitzwilliam am afraid ; for what becomes of the moral , if our comfort springs from a breach of promise ? for Fitzwilliam ought not to have mentioned the subject . mentioned will never do . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam need not distress Fitzwilliam . The moral will be perfectly fair . Cathleen ’s unjustifiable endeavours to separate us were the means of removing all Fitzwilliam doubts . Fitzwilliam am not indebted for Fitzwilliam present happiness to Fitzwilliam eager desire of expressing Fitzwilliam gratitude . Fitzwilliam was not in a humour to wait for any opening of Fitzwilliam . Cathleen ’s intelligence had given Fitzwilliam hope , and Fitzwilliam was determined at once to know every thing . ” 
 
  “ Cathleen ’s has been of infinite use , which ought to make Cathleen ’s happy , for Cathleen ’s loves to be of use . But tell Elizabeth ’s , what did Fitzwilliam come down to Netherfield for ? Was it merely to ride to Longbourn and be embarrassed ? or had Fitzwilliam intended any more serious consequence ? ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam real purpose was to see Fitzwilliam , and to judge , if Fitzwilliam could , whether Fitzwilliam might ever hope to make Fitzwilliam love Fitzwilliam . Fitzwilliam avowed one , or what Fitzwilliam avowed to Fitzwilliam , was to see whether Cathleen ’s were still partial to Charles , and if Cathleen ’s were , to make the confession to Charles which Fitzwilliam have since made . ” 
 
  “ Shall Fitzwilliam ever have courage to announce to Cathleen ’s what is to befall Cathleen ’s ? ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam am more likely to want time than courage , Fitzwilliam . But it ought to be done , and if Fitzwilliam will give Fitzwilliam a sheet of paper , it shall be done directly . ” 
 
  “ And if Fitzwilliam had not a letter to write Fitzwilliam , Fitzwilliam might sit by Fitzwilliam and admire the evenness of Fitzwilliam writing , as another young lady once did . But Fitzwilliam have an aunt , too , who must not be longer neglected . ” 
 
  From an unwillingness to confess how much Elizabeth ’s intimacy with Fitzwilliam had been over - rated , Elizabeth ’s had never yet answered Madeline ’s long letter ; but now , having that to communicate which Elizabeth ’s knew would be most welcome , Elizabeth ’s was almost ashamed to find that Elizabeth ’s uncle and aunt had already lost three days of happiness , and immediately wrote as follows : 
 
  “ Elizabeth ’s would have thanked Fitzwilliam before , Fitzwilliam , as Elizabeth ’s ought to have done , for Fitzwilliam long , kind , satisfactory , detail of particulars ; but to say the truth , Elizabeth ’s was too cross to write . Fitzwilliam supposed more than really existed . But now suppose as much as Fitzwilliam choose ; give a loose rein to Fitzwilliam fancy , indulge Fitzwilliam imagination in every possible flight which the subject will afford , and unless Fitzwilliam believe Elizabeth ’s actually married , Fitzwilliam can not greatly err . Fitzwilliam must write again very soon , and praise Fitzwilliam a great deal more than Fitzwilliam did in Fitzwilliam last . Elizabeth ’s thank Fitzwilliam , again and again , for not going to the Lakes . How could Elizabeth ’s be so silly as to wish going ! Fitzwilliam idea of the ponies is delightful . We will go round the Park every day . Elizabeth ’s am the happiest creature in the world . Perhaps other people have said so before , but not one with such justice . Elizabeth ’s am happier even than Jane ; Jane only smiles , Elizabeth ’s laugh . Fitzwilliam sends Fitzwilliam all the love in the world that Fitzwilliam can spare from Elizabeth ’s . Fitzwilliam are all to come to Pemberley at Christmas . Fitzwilliam , etc . ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam ’s letter to Cathleen ’s was in a different style ; and still different from either was what Father sent to William Collins , in reply to Father last . 
 
  “ Dear Sir,“I must trouble William Collins once more for congratulations . Elizabeth ’s will soon be the wife of Fitzwilliam . Console Cathleen ’s as well as William Collins can . But , if Fitzwilliam were William Collins , Fitzwilliam would stand by Fitzwilliam . Fitzwilliam has more to give . 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam sincerely , etc . ” 
 
  Caroline ’s congratulations to Caroline ’s brother , on Caroline ’s brother approaching marriage , were all that was affectionate and insincere . Caroline ’s wrote even to Jane on the occasion , to express Caroline ’s delight , and repeat all Caroline ’s former professions of regard . Jane was not deceived , but Jane was affected ; and though feeling no reliance on Caroline ’s , could not help writing Caroline ’s a much kinder answer than Jane knew was deserved . 
 
  The joy which Georgiana expressed on receiving similar information , was as sincere as Georgiana brother ’s in sending similar information . Four sides of paper were insufficient to contain all Georgiana delight , and all Georgiana earnest desire of being loved by Georgiana sister . 
 
  Before any answer could arrive from William Collins , or any congratulations to Elizabeth ’s from William Collins wife , the Longbourn family heard that the Collinses were come the Collinses to Lucas Lodge . The reason of come was soon evident . Cathleen ’s had been rendered so exceedingly angry by the contents of Cathleen ’s nephew ’s letter , that Charlotte , really rejoicing in Caroline ’s brother approaching marriage , was anxious to get away till the storm was blown over . At such a moment , the arrival of William Collins was a sincere pleasure to Elizabeth ’s , though in the course of their meetings Elizabeth ’s must sometimes think the pleasure dearly bought , when Elizabeth ’s saw Fitzwilliam exposed to all the parading and obsequious civility of Elizabeth ’s husband . Fitzwilliam bore it , however , with admirable calmness . Fitzwilliam could even listen to William Collins , when Fitzwilliam complimented William Collins on carrying away the brightest jewel of the country , and expressed Fitzwilliam hopes of their all meeting frequently at St. James ’s , with very decent composure . If Fitzwilliam did shrug Fitzwilliam shoulders , it was not till William Collins was out of sight . 
 
  Mrs. Phillips ’s vulgarity was another , and perhaps a greater , tax on William Collins forbearance ; and though Mrs. Phillips ’s , as well as Mrs. Phillips ’s sister , stood in too much awe of William Collins to speak with the familiarity which Charles ’s good humour encouraged , yet , whenever Mrs. Phillips ’s did speak , Mrs. Phillips ’s must be vulgar . Nor was Mrs. Phillips ’s respect for William Collins , though Mrs. Phillips ’s respect for William Collins made Mrs. Phillips ’s more quiet , at all likely to make Mrs. Phillips ’s more elegant . Elizabeth ’s did all Elizabeth ’s could to shield William Collins from the frequent notice of either , and was ever anxious to keep William Collins to Elizabeth ’s , and to those of Elizabeth ’s family with whom William Collins might converse without mortification ; and though the uncomfortable feelings arising from all this took from the season of courtship much of the season of courtship pleasure , all this added to the hope of the future ; and Elizabeth ’s looked forward with delight to the time when they should be removed from society so little pleasing to either , to all the comfort and elegance of they family party at Pemberley . 
 Chapter
 
  Happy for all Mother maternal feelings was the day on which Mother got rid of Mother two most deserving daughters . With what delighted pride Mother afterwards visited Jane , and talked of Elizabeth , may be guessed . I wish I could say , for the sake of Mother family , that the accomplishment of Mother earnest desire in the establishment of so many of Mother children produced so happy an effect as to make Mother a sensible , amiable , well - informed woman for the rest of Mother life ; though perhaps it was lucky for Mother husband , who might not have relished domestic felicity in so unusual a form , that Mother still was occasionally nervous and invariably silly . 
 
  Father missed Father second daughter exceedingly ; Father affection for Elizabeth drew Father oftener from home than anything else could do . Father delighted in going to Pemberley , especially when Father was least expected . 
 
  Charles and Jane remained at Netherfield only a twelvemonth . So near a vicinity to Jane mother and Meryton relations was not desirable even to Charles easy temper , or Jane affectionate heart . The darling wish of Charles sisters was then gratified ; Charles bought an estate in a neighbouring county to Derbyshire , and Jane and Elizabeth , in addition to every other source of happiness , were within thirty miles of each other . 
 
  Kitty , to Kitty very material advantage , spent the chief of Kitty time with Kitty two elder sisters . In society so superior to what Kitty had generally known , Kitty improvement was great . Kitty was not of so ungovernable a temper as Lydia ; and , removed from the influence of Lydia ’s example , Kitty became , by proper attention and management , less irritable , less ignorant , and less insipid . From the further disadvantage of Lydia ’s society Kitty was of course carefully kept , and though Lydia frequently invited Kitty to come and stay with Lydia , with the promise of balls and young men , Kitty father would never consent to Kitty going . 
 
  Mary was the only daughter who remained at home ; and Mary was necessarily drawn from the pursuit of accomplishments by Mother ’s being quite unable to sit alone . Mary was obliged to mix more with the world , but Mary could still moralize over every morning visit ; and as Mary was no longer mortified by comparisons between Mary sisters ’ beauty and Mary own , it was suspected by Mary father that Mary submitted to the change without much reluctance . 
 
  As for George and Lydia , George and Lydia characters suffered no revolution from the marriage of Mary sisters . George bore with philosophy the conviction that Elizabeth must now become acquainted with whatever of George ingratitude and falsehood had before been unknown to Elizabeth ; and in spite of every thing , was not wholly without hope that George might yet be prevailed on to make George fortune . The congratulatory letter which Elizabeth received from Lydia on Elizabeth marriage , explained to Elizabeth that , by Lydia at least , if not by Lydia , such a hope was cherished . The congratulatory letter which Elizabeth received from Lydia on Elizabeth marriage was to this effect : 
 
  “ Lydia dear Elizabeth , 
  “ Lydia wish Elizabeth joy . If Elizabeth love George half as well as Lydia do Lydia dear George , Elizabeth must be very happy . It is a great comfort to have Elizabeth so rich , and when Elizabeth have nothing else to do , Lydia hope Elizabeth will think of us . Lydia am sure George would like a place at court very much , and Lydia do not think us shall have quite money enough to live upon without some help . Any place would do , of about three or four hundred a year ; but however , do not speak to George about it , if Elizabeth had rather not . 
 
  “ Elizabeth , etc . ” 
 
  As it happened that Elizabeth had much rather not , Elizabeth endeavoured in Elizabeth answer to put an end to every entreaty and expectation of the kind . Such relief , however , as it was in Elizabeth power to afford , by the practice of what might be called economy in Elizabeth own private expences , Elizabeth frequently sent them . It had always been evident to Elizabeth that such an income as them , under the direction of two persons so extravagant in them wants , and heedless of the future , must be very insufficient to them support ; and whenever them changed them quarters , either Jane or Elizabeth were sure of being applied to for some little assistance towards discharging them bills . them manner of living , even when the restoration of peace dismissed them to a home , was unsettled in the extreme . them were always moving from place to place in quest of a cheap situation , and always spending more than them ought . George affection for Elizabeth soon sunk into indifference ; Elizabeth lasted a little longer ; and in spite of Elizabeth youth and Elizabeth manners , Elizabeth retained all the claims to reputation which Elizabeth marriage had given Elizabeth . 
 
  Though George could never receive George at Pemberley , yet , for Elizabeth ’s sake , George assisted George further in George profession . Lydia was occasionally a visitor there , when Lydia husband was gone to enjoy George in London or Bath ; and with the Bingleys they both of them frequently staid so long , that even Charles ’s good humour was overcome , and even Charles ’s proceeded so far as to talk of giving them a hint to be gone . 
 
  Caroline was very deeply mortified by Elizabeth marriage ; but as Caroline thought it advisable to retain the right of visiting at Pemberley , Caroline dropt all Caroline resentment ; was fonder than ever of Georgiana , almost as attentive to George as heretofore , and paid off every arrear of civility to Elizabeth . 
 
  Pemberley was now Georgiana ’s home ; and the attachment of the sisters was exactly what George had hoped to see . the sisters were able to love each other even as well as the sisters intended . Georgiana had the highest opinion in the world of Elizabeth ; though at first Georgiana often listened with an astonishment bordering on alarm at Elizabeth lively , sportive , manner of talking to George . George , Georgiana now saw the object of open pleasantry . Georgiana mind received knowledge which had never before fallen in Georgiana way . By Elizabeth ’s instructions , Georgiana began to comprehend that a woman may take liberties with a woman husband which a brother will not always allow in a sister more than ten years younger than a brother . 
 
  Cathleen was extremely indignant on the marriage of Cathleen nephew ; and as Cathleen gave way to all the genuine frankness of Cathleen character in Cathleen reply to the letter which announced the marriage of Cathleen nephew arrangement , Cathleen sent Cathleen nephew language so very abusive , especially of Elizabeth , that for some time all intercourse was at an end . But at length , by Elizabeth ’s persuasion , Cathleen nephew was prevailed on to overlook the offence , and seek a reconciliation ; and , after a little further resistance on the part of Cathleen nephew aunt , Cathleen resentment gave way , either to Cathleen affection for Cathleen nephew , or Cathleen curiosity to see how Cathleen nephew wife conducted Elizabeth ; and Cathleen condescended to wait on them at Pemberley , in spite of that pollution which Pemberley woods had received , not merely from the presence of such a mistress , but the visits of Elizabeth uncle and aunt from the city . 
 
  With the Gardiners , them were always on the most intimate terms . George , as well as Elizabeth , really loved the Gardiners ; and George , as well as Elizabeth were both ever sensible of the warmest gratitude towards the persons who , by bringing Elizabeth into Derbyshire , had been the means of uniting George , as well as Elizabeth . 
ChapterChapter 
  It is a truth universally acknowledged , that a single man in possession of a good fortune , must be in want of a wife . 
 
  However little known the feelings or views of such a man may be on such a man first entering a neighbourhood , this truth is so well fixed in the minds of the surrounding families , that such a man is considered as the rightful property of some one or other of the surrounding families daughters . 
 
  “ Mother dear Father , ” said Mother to Mother dear Father one day , “ have Mother dear Father heard that Netherfield Park is let at last ? ” 
 
  Mother dear Father replied that Mother dear Father had not . 
 
  “ But Netherfield Park is , ” returned Mother ; “ for Mrs. Long has just been here , and Mrs. Long told Mother all about Netherfield Park . ” 
 
  Mother dear Father made no answer . 
 
  “ Do not Mother dear Father want to know who has taken Netherfield Park ? ” cried Mother impatiently . 
 
  “ Mother dear Father want to tell Mother , and Mother have no objection to hearing it . ” 
 
  This was invitation enough . 
 
  “ Why , Mother dear Father dear , Mother must know , Mrs. Long says that Netherfield Park is taken by a young man of large fortune from the north of England ; that a young man of large fortune from the north of England came down on Monday in a chaise and four to see Netherfield Park , and was so much delighted with Netherfield Park that a young man of large fortune from the north of England agreed with Mr. Morris immediately ; that a young man of large fortune from the north of England is to take possession before Michaelmas , and some of a young man of large fortune from the north of England servants are to be in the house by the end of next week . ” 
 
  “ What is a young man of large fortune from the north of England name ? ” 
 
  “ a young man of large fortune from the north of England name 
 
  “ Is a young man of large fortune from the north of England married or single ? ” 
 
  “ Oh ! single , Mother dear Father dear , to be sure ! a young man of large fortune from the north of England What a fine thing for our girls ! ” 
 
  “ How so ? how can it affect our girls ? ” 
 
  “ Mother dear Father , ” replied Mother , “ how can Mother dear Father be so tiresome ! Mother dear Father must know that Mother am thinking of a young man of large fortune from the north of England marrying one of our girls . ” 
 
  “ Is that a young man of large fortune from the north of England design in settling here ? ” 
 
  “ Design ! nonsense , how can Mother dear Father talk so ! But it is very likely that a young man of large fortune from the north of England may fall in love with one of our girls , and therefore Mother dear Father must visit a young man of large fortune from the north of England as soon as a young man of large fortune from the north of England comes . ” 
 
  “ Mother dear Father see no occasion for visit . Mother and our girls may go , or Mother may send our girls by our girls , which perhaps will be still better , for as Mother are as handsome as any of our girls , a young man of large fortune from the north of England might like Mother the best of the party . ” 
 
  “ Mother dear Father dear , Mother dear Father flatter Mother dear Father . Mother dear Father certainly have had Mother dear Father share of beauty , but Mother dear Father do not pretend to be anything extraordinary now . When a woman has five grown - up daughters , a woman ought to give over thinking of a woman own beauty . ” 
 
  “ In such cases , a woman has not often much beauty to think of . ” 
 
  “ But , Mother dear Father dear , Mother dear Father must indeed go and see a young man of large fortune from the north of England when a young man of large fortune from the north of England comes into the neighbourhood . ” 
 
  “ It is more than Mother dear Father engage for , Mother dear Father assure Mother . ” 
 
  “ But consider our girls . Only think what an establishment it would be for one of our girls . Sir William and Lady Lucas are determined to go , merely on that account , for in general , you know , Sir William and Lady Lucas visit no newcomers . Indeed Mother dear Father must go , for it will be impossible for us to visit a young man of large fortune from the north of England , if Mother dear Father do not . ” 
 
  “ Mother dear Father are over scrupulous , surely . Mother dear Father dare say a young man of large fortune from the north of England will be very glad to see Mother dear Father ; and Mother dear Father will send a few lines by Mother dear Father to assure a young man of large fortune from the north of England of Mother dear Father hearty consent to a young man of large fortune from the north of England marrying whichever a young man of large fortune from the north of England chooses of our girls ; though Mother dear Father must throw in a good word for Mother dear Father little Elizabeth . ” 
 
  “ Mother dear Father desire Mother dear Father will do no such thing . Mother dear Father little Elizabeth is not a bit better than the others ; and Mother dear Father am sure Mother dear Father little Elizabeth is not half so handsome as Jane , nor half so good - humoured as Lydia . But Mother dear Father are always giving Mother dear Father little Elizabeth the preference . ” 
 
  “ the others have none of the others much to recommend the others , ” replied Mother dear Father ; “ the others are all silly and ignorant like other girls ; but Mother dear Father little Elizabeth has something more of quickness than Mother dear Father little Elizabeth sisters . ” 
 
  “ Mother dear Father , how can Mother dear Father abuse Mother dear Father own children in such a way ? Mother dear Father take delight in vexing Mother dear Father . Mother dear Father have no compassion on Mother dear Father poor nerves . ” 
 
  “ Mother dear Father mistake Mother dear Father , Mother dear Father dear . Mother dear Father have a high respect for Mother dear Father poor nerves . Mother dear Father poor nerves are Mother dear Father old friends . Mother dear Father have heard Mother dear Father mention Mother dear Father poor nerves with consideration these twenty years at least . ” 
 
  “ Ah , Mother dear Father do not know what Mother dear Father suffer . ” 
 
  “ But Mother dear Father hope Mother dear Father will get over it , and live to see many young men of four thousand a year come into the neighbourhood . ” 
 
  “ It will be no use to us , if twenty such should come , since Mother dear Father will not visit twenty such . ” 
 
  “ Depend upon it , Mother dear Father dear , that when there are twenty , Mother dear Father will visit twenty . ” 
 
  Mother dear Father was so odd a mixture of quick parts , sarcastic humour , reserve , and caprice , that the experience of three - and - twenty years had been insufficient to make Mother dear Father wife understand Mother dear Father character . Mother mind was less difficult to develop . Mother was a woman of mean understanding , little information , and uncertain temper . When Mother was discontented , Mother fancied Mother nervous . The business of Mother life was to get our girls married ; The business of Mother life solace was visiting and news . 
 Chapter
 
  Father was among the earliest of those who waited on Charles . Father had always intended to visit Charles , though to the last always assuring Father wife that Father should not go ; and till the evening after the visit was paid Father wife had no knowledge of visit . visit was then disclosed in the following manner . Observing Father second daughter employed in trimming a hat , Father suddenly addressed Father second daughter with , 
 
  “ Father hope Charles will like a hat , Father second daughter . ” 
 
  “ We are not in a way to know what Charles likes , ” said Father wife resentfully , “ since we are not to visit . ” 
 
  “ But Father wife forget , Father wife , ” said Father second daughter , “ that we shall meet Charles at the assemblies , and that Mrs. Long has promised to introduce Charles . ” 
 
  “ Father do not believe Mrs. Long will do any such thing . Mrs. Long has two nieces of Mrs. Long own . Mrs. Long is a selfish , hypocritical woman , and Father have no opinion of Mrs. Long . ” 
 
  “ No more have Father , ” said Father ; “ and Father am glad to find that Father second daughter do not depend on Mrs. Long serving Father second daughter . ” 
 
  Father wife deigned not to make any reply ; but , unable to contain Father wife , began scolding one of Father wife daughters . 
 
  “ Do n’t keep coughing so , one of Father wife daughters , for heaven ’s sake ! Have a little compassion on Father wife nerves . one of Father wife daughters tear Father wife nerves to pieces . ” 
 
  “ one of Father wife daughters has no discretion in one of Father wife daughters coughs , ” said one of Father wife daughters father ; “ one of Father wife daughters times Father wife nerves ill . ” 
 
  “ one of Father wife daughters do not cough for one of Father wife daughters own amusement , ” replied one of Father wife daughters fretfully . “ When is Father second daughter next ball to be , Father second daughter ? ” 
 
  “ To - morrow fortnight . ” 
 
  “ Aye , so it is , ” cried Father wife , “ and Mrs. Long does not come back till the day before ; so , it will be impossible for Mrs. Long to introduce Charles , for Mrs. Long will not know Charles Mrs. Long . ” 
 
  “ Then , Father second daughter , Father second daughter may have the advantage of Father second daughter friend , and introduce Charles to Father second daughter friend . ” 
 
  “ Impossible , Father , impossible , when Father second daughter am not acquainted with Charles Father second daughter ; how can Father be so teasing ? ” 
 
  “ Father honour Father second daughter circumspection . A fortnight ’s acquaintance is certainly very little . One can not know what a man really is by the end of a fortnight . But if we do not venture somebody else will ; and after all , Mrs. Long and Father second daughter friend nieces must stand two nieces of Mrs. Long own chance ; and , therefore , as Father second daughter friend will think it an act of kindness , if Father second daughter decline the office , Father will take the office on Father . ” 
 
  Father wife daughters stared at Father wife daughters father . Father wife said only , “ Nonsense , nonsense ! ” 
 
  “ What can be the meaning of that emphatic exclamation ? ” cried Father . “ Do Father wife consider the forms of introduction , and the stress that is laid on the forms of introduction , as nonsense ? Father can not quite agree with Father wife there . What say Father wife , Father wife ? for Father wife are a young lady of deep reflection , Father know , and read great books and make extracts . ” 
 
  Father wife wished to say something very sensible , but knew not how . 
 
  “ While Father wife is adjusting Father wife ideas , ” Father continued , “ let us return to Charles . ” 
 
  “ Father wife am sick of Charles , ” cried Father wife . 
 
  “ Father wife am sorry to hear that ; but why did not Father wife tell Father wife so before ? If Father wife had known as much this morning , Father wife certainly would not have called on Charles . It is very unlucky ; but as Father wife have actually paid the visit , we can not escape the acquaintance now . ” 
 
  The astonishment of Father wife daughters was just what Father wished ; that of Father wife perhaps surpassing the rest ; though when the first tumult of joy was over , Father wife began to declare that it was what Father wife had expected all the while . 
 
  “ How good it was in Father , Father wife dear Father ! But Father wife knew Father wife should persuade Father at last . Father wife was sure Father loved Father wife daughters too well to neglect such an acquaintance . Well , how pleased Father am ! and it is such a good joke , too , that Father should have gone this morning , and never said a word about it till now . ” 
 
  “ Now , one of Father wife daughters , one of Father wife daughters may cough as much as one of Father wife daughters choose , ” said Father ; and , as Father spoke , Father left the room , fatigued with the raptures of Father wife . 
 
  “ What an excellent father Father wife daughters have , Father wife daughters , ” said Father wife , when the door was shut . “ Father wife do not know how Father wife daughters will ever make Father amends for Father kindness ; or Father wife either , for that matter . At our time of life , it is not so pleasant , Father can tell Father wife daughters , to be making new acquaintance every day ; but for Father wife daughters sakes , our would do anything . Lydia , Father love , though Lydia are the youngest , Father dare say Charles will dance with Lydia at the next ball . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! ” said Lydia stoutly , “ Lydia am not afraid ; for though Lydia am the youngest , Lydia ’m the tallest . ” 
 
  The rest of the evening was spent in conjecturing how soon Lydia would return Father ’s visit , and determining when Father wife daughters should ask Lydia to dinner . 
 Chapter
 
  Not all that Mother , however , with the assistance of Mother five daughters , could ask on the subject , was sufficient to draw from Mother husband any satisfactory description of Charles . Mother five daughters attacked Charles in various ways ; with barefaced questions , ingenious suppositions , and distant surmises ; but Charles eluded the skill of Mother five daughters ; and Mother five daughters were at last obliged to accept the second - hand intelligence of Mother five daughters neighbour , Lady Lucas . Mother five daughters neighbour , Lady Lucas report was highly favourable . Mother husband had been delighted with Charles . Charles was quite young , wonderfully handsome , extremely agreeable , and , to crown the whole , Charles meant to be at the next assembly with a large party . Nothing could be more delightful ! To be fond of dancing was a certain step towards falling in love ; and very lively hopes of Charles ’s heart were entertained . 
 
  “ If Mother can but see one of Mother five daughters happily settled at Netherfield , ” said Mother to Mother husband , “ and all the others equally well married , Mother shall have nothing to wish for . ” 
 
  In a few days Charles returned Mother husband visit , and sat about ten minutes with Mother husband in Mother husband library . Charles had entertained hopes of being admitted to a sight of Mother five daughters ; but Charles saw Mother husband . Mother five daughters were somewhat more fortunate , for Mother five daughters had the advantage of ascertaining from an upper window , that Charles wore a blue coat and rode a black horse . 
 
  An invitation to dinner was soon afterwards dispatched ; and already had Mother planned the courses that were to do credit to Mother housekeeping , when an answer arrived which deferred it all . Charles was obliged to be in town the following day , and consequently unable to accept the honour of Mother five daughters invitation , etc . Mother was quite disconcerted . Mother could not imagine what business Charles could have in town so soon after Charles arrival in Hertfordshire ; and Mother began to fear that Charles might be always flying about from one place to another , and never settled at Netherfield as Charles ought to be . Mother five daughters neighbour , Lady Lucas quieted Mother fears a little by starting the idea of Charles being gone to London only to get a large party for the ball ; and a report soon followed that Charles was to bring twelve ladies and seven gentlemen with Charles to the next assembly . Mother five daughters grieved over such a number of ladies ; but were comforted the day before the ball by hearing , that instead of twelve , Charles had brought only six with Charles from London , Charles five sisters and a cousin . And when the party entered the assembly room the party consisted of only five altogether ; Charles , Charles two sisters , the husband of the eldest , and another young man . 
 
  Charles was good - looking and gentlemanlike ; Charles had a pleasant countenance , and easy , unaffected manners . Charles sisters were fine women , with an air of decided fashion . Charles brother - in - law , Mr. Hurst , merely looked Charles ; but Charles friend Fitzwilliam soon drew the attention of the room by Charles friend Fitzwilliam fine , tall person , handsome features , noble mien , and the report which was in general circulation within five minutes after Charles friend Fitzwilliam entrance , of Charles friend Fitzwilliam having ten thousand a year . The gentlemen pronounced Charles friend Fitzwilliam to be a fine figure of a man , the ladies declared Charles friend Fitzwilliam was much handsomer than Charles , and Charles friend Fitzwilliam was looked at with great admiration for about half the evening , till Charles friend Fitzwilliam manners gave a disgust which turned the tide of Charles friend Fitzwilliam popularity ; for Charles friend Fitzwilliam was discovered to be proud , to be above Charles friend Fitzwilliam company , and above being pleased ; and not all Charles friend Fitzwilliam large estate in Hertfordshire could then save Charles friend Fitzwilliam from having a most forbidding , disagreeable countenance , and being unworthy to be compared with Charles friend Fitzwilliam friend . 
 
  Charles had soon made Charles acquainted with all the principal people in the room ; Charles was lively and unreserved , danced every dance , was angry that the ball closed so early , and talked of giving one Charles at Netherfield . Such amiable qualities must speak for Such amiable qualities . What a contrast between Charles and Charles friend ! Charles friend Fitzwilliam danced only once with Charles brother - in - law , Mr. Hurst and once with Caroline , declined being introduced to any other lady , and spent the rest of the evening in walking about the assembly room , speaking occasionally to one of Charles friend Fitzwilliam own party . Charles friend Fitzwilliam character was decided . Charles friend Fitzwilliam was the proudest , most disagreeable man in the world , and everybody hoped that Charles friend Fitzwilliam would never come there again . Amongst the most violent against Charles friend Fitzwilliam was Mother , whose dislike of Charles friend Fitzwilliam general behaviour was sharpened into particular resentment by Charles friend Fitzwilliam having slighted one of Mother five daughters . 
 
  Elizabeth had been obliged , by the scarcity of gentlemen , to sit down for two dances ; and during part of two dances , Charles friend Fitzwilliam had been standing near enough for Elizabeth to overhear a conversation between Charles friend Fitzwilliam and Charles , who came from two dances for a few minutes , to press Charles to join two dances . 
 
  “ Come , Charles friend Fitzwilliam , ” said Charles , “ Charles must have Charles friend Fitzwilliam dance . Charles hate to see Charles friend Fitzwilliam standing about by Charles friend Fitzwilliam in this stupid manner . Charles friend Fitzwilliam had much better dance . ” 
 
  Charles friend Fitzwilliam Charles friend Fitzwilliam certainly shall not . You know how Charles friend Fitzwilliam detest dance , unless Charles friend Fitzwilliam am particularly acquainted with Charles friend Fitzwilliam partner . At such an assembly as this , dance would be insupportable . Mother five daughters are engaged , and there is not another woman in the room whom it would not be a punishment to Charles friend Fitzwilliam to stand up with . ” 
 
  “ Charles would not be so fastidious as Charles friend Fitzwilliam are , ” cried Charles , “ for a kingdom ! Upon Charles honour , Charles never met with so many pleasant girls in Charles life as Charles have this evening ; and there are several of so many pleasant girls Charles friend Fitzwilliam see uncommonly pretty . ” 
 
  “ Charles are dancing with Elizabeth , ” said Charles friend Fitzwilliam , looking at Elizabeth . 
 
  “ Oh ! Elizabeth is the most beautiful creature Charles friend Fitzwilliam ever beheld ! But there is one of Elizabeth sisters sitting down just behind Charles friend Fitzwilliam , who is very pretty , and Charles friend Fitzwilliam dare say very agreeable . Do let Charles friend Fitzwilliam ask Charles friend Fitzwilliam partner to introduce Charles friend Fitzwilliam . ” 
 
  “ Which do Charles friend Fitzwilliam mean ? ” and turning round , Charles friend Fitzwilliam looked for a moment at Elizabeth , till catching Elizabeth eye , Charles friend Fitzwilliam withdrew Charles friend Fitzwilliam own and coldly said , “ Elizabeth is tolerable ; but not handsome enough to tempt Charles friend Fitzwilliam ; and Charles friend Fitzwilliam am in no humour at present to give consequence to young ladies who are slighted by other men . Charles friend Fitzwilliam had better return to Charles friend Fitzwilliam partner and enjoy Elizabeth smiles , for Charles friend Fitzwilliam are wasting Charles friend Fitzwilliam time with Charles friend Fitzwilliam . ” 
 
  Charles followed Charles friend Fitzwilliam advice . Charles friend Fitzwilliam walked off ; and Elizabeth remained with no very cordial feelings towards Charles friend Fitzwilliam . Elizabeth told the story , however , with great spirit among Elizabeth friends ; for Elizabeth had a lively , playful disposition , which delighted in anything ridiculous . 
 
  The evening altogether passed off pleasantly to the whole family . Mother had seen Elizabeth much admired by the Netherfield party . Charles had danced with Elizabeth twice , and Elizabeth had been distinguished by Charles sisters . Jane was as much gratified by this as Jane mother could be , though in a quieter way . Elizabeth felt Jane ’s pleasure . Mary had heard Mary mentioned to Caroline as the most accomplished girl in the neighbourhood ; and Catherine and Lydia had been fortunate enough to be never without partners , which was all that Catherine and Lydia had yet learnt to care for at a ball . Catherine and Lydia returned , therefore , in good spirits to Longbourn , the village where Catherine and Lydia lived , and of which Catherine and Lydia were the principal inhabitants . Catherine and Lydia found Mother husband still up . With a book Mother husband was regardless of time ; and on the present occasion Mother husband had a good deal of curiosity as to the event of an evening which had raised such splendid expectations . Mother husband had rather hoped that all Mother husband wife ’s views on Elizabeth would be disappointed ; but Mother husband soon found that Mother husband had a very different story to hear . 
 
  “ Oh , Mother dear Father , ” as Elizabeth entered the room , “ we have had a most delightful evening , a most excellent ball . Elizabeth wish Mother husband had been there . Jane was so admired , nothing could be like it . Everybody said how well Jane looked ; and Charles thought Jane quite beautiful , and danced with Jane twice . Only think of that , Elizabeth ; Charles actually danced with Jane twice ; and Jane was the only creature in the room that Charles asked a second time . First of all , Charles asked Mother five daughters neighbour , Lady Lucas . Elizabeth was so vexed to see Charles stand up with Mother five daughters neighbour , Lady Lucas ; but , however , Charles did not admire Mother five daughters neighbour , Lady Lucas at all ; indeed , nobody can , you know ; and Charles seemed quite struck with Jane as Jane was going down the dance . So Charles enquired who Jane was , and got introduced , and asked Jane for the two next . Then , the two third Charles danced with Miss King , and the two fourth with Mother five daughters neighbour , Lady Lucas , and the two fifth with Jane again , and the two sixth with Elizabeth , and the Boulanger — ” 
 
  “ If Charles had had any compassion for Mother husband , ” cried Mother husband husband impatiently , “ Charles would not have danced half so much ! For God ’s sake , say no more of Charles partners . Oh that Charles had sprained Charles ankle in the first dance ! ” 
 
  “ Oh ! Mother dear , ” continued Mother , “ Mother am quite delighted with Charles . Charles is so excessively handsome ! and Charles sisters are charming women . Mother never in Mother life saw anything more elegant than Charles sisters dresses . Mother dare say the lace upon Charles brother - in - law , Mr. Hurst gown — ” 
 
  Here Elizabeth was interrupted again . Mother husband protested against any description of finery . Elizabeth was therefore obliged to seek another branch of the subject , and related , with much bitterness of spirit and some exaggeration , the shocking rudeness of Charles friend Fitzwilliam . 
 
  “ But Mother can assure Charles friend Fitzwilliam , ” Elizabeth added , “ that Elizabeth does not lose much by not suiting Charles friend Fitzwilliam fancy ; for Charles friend Fitzwilliam is a most disagreeable , horrid man , not at all worth pleasing . So high and so conceited that there was no enduring Charles friend Fitzwilliam ! Charles friend Fitzwilliam walked here , and Charles friend Fitzwilliam walked there , fancying Charles friend Fitzwilliam so very great ! Not handsome enough to dance with ! Mother wish Charles friend Fitzwilliam had been there , Charles friend Fitzwilliam , to have given Charles friend Fitzwilliam one of Charles friend Fitzwilliam set - downs . Mother quite detest Charles friend Fitzwilliam . ” 
 Chapter
 
  When Jane and Elizabeth were alone , the former , who had been cautious in the former , who had been cautious in praise of Charles before , expressed to Elizabeth how very much the former , who had been cautious in admired Charles . 
 
  “ Charles is just what a young man ought to be , ” said the former , who had been cautious in , “ sensible , good - humoured , lively ; and the former , who had been cautious in never saw such happy manners!—so much ease , with such perfect good breeding ! ” 
 
  “ Charles is also handsome , ” replied Elizabeth , “ which a young man ought likewise to be , if a young man possibly can . Charles character is thereby complete . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth was very much flattered by Charles asking Elizabeth to dance a second time . Elizabeth did not expect such a compliment . ” 
 
  “ Did not Elizabeth ? I did for Elizabeth . But that is one great difference between us . Compliments always take Elizabeth by surprise , and I never . What could be more natural than Charles asking Elizabeth again ? Charles could not help seeing that Elizabeth were about five times as pretty as every other woman in the room . No thanks to Charles gallantry for seeing . Well , Charles certainly is very agreeable , and I give Elizabeth leave to like Charles . Elizabeth have liked many a stupider person . ” 
 
  “ Dear Elizabeth ! ” 
 
  “ Oh ! Elizabeth are a great deal too apt , you know , to like people in general . Elizabeth never see a fault in anybody . All the world are good and agreeable in Elizabeth eyes . I never heard Elizabeth speak ill of a human being in I life . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth would wish not to be hasty in censuring any one ; but Elizabeth always speak what Elizabeth think . ” 
 
  “ I know Elizabeth do ; and it is that which makes the wonder . With Elizabeth good sense , to be so honestly blind to the follies and nonsense of others ! Affectation of candour is common enough;—one meets with Affectation of candour everywhere . But to be candid without ostentation or design — to take the good of everybody ’s character and make everybody ’s character still better , and say nothing of the bad — belongs to Elizabeth . And so , Elizabeth like Charles sisters , too , do Elizabeth ? Charles sisters manners are not equal to Charles . ” 
 
  “ Certainly not ; at first . But Charles sisters are very pleasing women when you converse with Charles sisters . Caroline is to live with Caroline brother , and keep Caroline brother house ; and Jane am much mistaken if we shall not find a very charming neighbour in Caroline . ” 
 
  Elizabeth listened in silence , but was not convinced ; Charles sisters behaviour at the assembly had not been calculated to please in general ; and with more quickness of observation and less pliancy of temper than Elizabeth sister , and with a judgment too unassailed by any attention to Elizabeth , Elizabeth was very little disposed to approve Charles sisters . Charles sisters were in fact very fine ladies ; not deficient in good humour when Charles sisters were pleased , nor in the power of being agreeable where Charles sisters chose it ; but proud and conceited . Charles sisters were rather handsome , had been educated in one of the first private seminaries in town , had a fortune of twenty thousand pounds , were in the habit of spending more than Charles sisters ought , and of associating with people of rank ; and were therefore in every respect entitled to think well of Charles sisters , and meanly of others . Charles sisters were of a respectable family in the north of England ; a circumstance more deeply impressed on Charles sisters memories than that Charles sisters brother ’s fortune and Charles sisters own had been acquired by trade . 
 
  Charles inherited property to the amount of nearly a hundred thousand pounds from Charles father , who had intended to purchase an estate , but did not live to do purchase . Charles intended it likewise , and sometimes made choice of Charles county ; but as Charles was now provided with a good house and the liberty of a manor , it was doubtful to many of those who best knew the easiness of Charles temper , whether Charles might not spend the remainder of Charles days at Netherfield , and leave the next generation to purchase . 
 
  Charles sisters were very anxious for Charles having an estate of Charles own ; but though Charles was now established only as a tenant , Caroline was by no means unwilling to preside at Charles table , nor was Mrs. Hurst , who had married a man of more fashion than fortune , less disposed to consider a good house as Mrs. Hurst home when it suited Mrs. Hurst . Charles had not been of age two years , when Charles was tempted by an accidental recommendation to look at a good house . Charles did look at a good house , and into a good house for half an hour , was pleased with the situation and the principal rooms , satisfied with what the owner said in its praise , and took a good house immediately . 
 
  Between Charles and Fitzwilliam there was a very steady friendship , in spite of great opposition of character . Charles was endeared to Fitzwilliam by the easiness , openness , and ductility of Fitzwilliam temper , though no disposition could offer a greater contrast to Charles own , and though with Charles own Charles never appeared dissatisfied . On the strength of Fitzwilliam ’s regard Charles had the firmest reliance , and of Fitzwilliam judgment the highest opinion . In understanding , Fitzwilliam was the superior . Charles was by no means deficient , but Fitzwilliam was clever . Fitzwilliam was at the same time haughty , reserved , and fastidious , and Fitzwilliam manners , though well bred , were not inviting . In that respect Charles friend had greatly the advantage . Charles was sure of being liked wherever Charles appeared , Fitzwilliam was continually giving offence . 
 
  The manner in which Charles and Fitzwilliam spoke of the assembly was sufficiently characteristic . Charles had never met with pleasanter people or prettier girls in I life ; everybody had been most kind and attentive to Charles ; there had been no formality , no stiffness ; Charles had soon felt acquainted with all the room ; and as to Caroline , Charles could not conceive an angel more beautiful . Fitzwilliam , on the contrary , had seen a collection of people in whom there was little beauty and no fashion , for none of whom Fitzwilliam had felt the smallest interest , and from none received either attention or pleasure . Caroline Fitzwilliam acknowledged to be pretty , but Caroline smiled too much . 
 
  Mrs. Hurst and Caroline allowed it to be so — but still Mrs. Hurst and Caroline admired Caroline and liked Caroline , and pronounced Caroline to be a sweet girl , and one whom Mrs. Hurst and Caroline should not object to know more of . Caroline was therefore established as a sweet girl , and Fitzwilliam felt authorised by such commendation to think of Caroline as Fitzwilliam chose . 
 Chapter
 
  Within a short walk of Longbourn lived a family with whom the Bennets were particularly intimate . Sir William Lucas had been formerly in trade in Meryton , where Sir William Lucas had made a tolerable fortune , and risen to the honour of knighthood by an address to the king during Sir William Lucas mayoralty . the honour of knighthood had perhaps been felt too strongly . the honour of knighthood had given Sir William Lucas a disgust to Sir William Lucas business and to Sir William Lucas residence in a small market town ; and , quitting them both , Sir William Lucas had removed with Sir William Lucas family to a house about a mile from Meryton , where Sir William Lucas had made a tolerable fortune , and risen to the honour of knighthood by an address to the king during Sir William Lucas mayoralty , denominated from that period Lucas Lodge , where Sir William Lucas could think with pleasure of Sir William Lucas own importance , and , unshackled by business , occupy Sir William Lucas solely in being civil to all the world . For , though elated by Sir William Lucas rank , Sir William Lucas rank did not render Sir William Lucas supercilious ; on the contrary , Sir William Lucas was all attention to everybody . By nature inoffensive , friendly , and obliging , Sir William Lucas presentation at St. James ’s had made Sir William Lucas courteous . 
 
  Lady Lucas was a very good kind of woman , not too clever to be a valuable neighbour to Mother . the Miss Lucases and the Bennets had several children . The eldest of several children , a sensible , intelligent young woman , about twenty - seven , was Elizabeth ’s intimate friend . 
 
  That the Miss Lucases and the Bennets should meet to talk over a ball was absolutely necessary ; and the morning after the assembly brought the former to Longbourn to hear and to communicate . 
 
  “ Charlotte began the evening well , Charlotte , ” said Mother with civil self - command to Charlotte . “ Charlotte were Charles ’s first choice . ” 
 
  Charlotte Yes ; but Charles ’s seemed to like Charles ’s second better . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! Charlotte mean Jane , Charlotte suppose , because Charles ’s danced with Jane twice . To be sure that did seem as if Charles ’s admired Jane — indeed Charlotte rather believe Charles ’s did — Charlotte heard something about it — but Charlotte hardly know what — something about Mr. Robinson . ” 
 
  “ Perhaps Mother mean what Charlotte overheard between Charles ’s and Mr. Robinson ; did not Charlotte mention it to Mother ? Mr. Robinson ’s asking Charles ’s how Charles ’s liked our Meryton , where Sir William Lucas had made a tolerable fortune , and risen to the honour of knighthood by an address to the king during Sir William Lucas mayoralty assemblies , and whether Charles ’s did not think there were a great many pretty women in the room , and which Charles ’s thought the prettiest ? and Charles ’s answering immediately to the last question—‘Oh ! Jane , beyond a doubt , there can not be two opinions on that point . ’ ” 
 
  “ Upon Mother word ! Well , that was very decided indeed — that does seem as if — but , however , it may all come to nothing , Mother know . ” 
 
  “ My overhearings were more to the purpose than Elizabeth ’s , Elizabeth ’s , ” said Charlotte . “ Sir William Lucas is not so well worth listening to as Sir William Lucas friend , is he?—Poor Elizabeth!—to be only just tolerable . ” 
 
  “ Mother beg My would not put it into Elizabeth ’s head to be vexed by Sir William Lucas ill - treatment , for Sir William Lucas is such a disagreeable man that it would be quite a misfortune to be liked by Sir William Lucas . Mrs. Long told Charlotte last night that Sir William Lucas sat close to Mrs. Long for half an hour without once opening Sir William Lucas lips . ” 
 
  “ Are Mother quite sure , ma’am?—is not there a little mistake ? ” said Jane . “ Jane certainly saw Sir William Lucas speaking to Mrs. Long . ” 
 
  “ Aye — because Mrs. Long asked Sir William Lucas at last how Sir William Lucas liked Netherfield , and Sir William Lucas could not help answering Mrs. Long ; but Mrs. Long said Sir William Lucas seemed very angry at being spoke to . ” 
 
  “ Caroline told Jane , ” said Jane , “ that Sir William Lucas never speaks much unless among Sir William Lucas intimate acquaintance . With Sir William Lucas intimate acquaintance Sir William Lucas is remarkably agreeable . ” 
 
  “ Mother do not believe a word of it , Mother dear . If Sir William Lucas had been so very agreeable , Sir William Lucas would have talked to Mrs. Long . But Mother can guess how it was ; everybody says that Sir William Lucas is eat up with pride , and Mother dare say Sir William Lucas had heard somehow that Mrs. Long does not keep a carriage , and had come to a ball in a hack chaise . ” 
 
  “ Mother do not mind Sir William Lucas not talking to Mrs. Long , ” said Mother , “ but Mother wish Sir William Lucas had danced with Elizabeth ’s . ” 
 
  “ Another time , Elizabeth ’s , ” said Elizabeth ’s mother , “ Mother would not dance with Sir William Lucas , if Mother were Elizabeth ’s . ” 
 
  “ Mother believe , Mother , Mother may safely promise Mother never to dance with Sir William Lucas . ” 
 
  “ Sir William Lucas pride , ” said Mother , “ does not offend Mother so much as pride often does , because there is an excuse for Sir William Lucas pride . One can not wonder that so very fine a young man , with family , fortune , everything in Sir William Lucas favour , should think highly of Sir William Lucas . If Mother may so express it , Sir William Lucas has a right to be proud . ” 
 
  “ That is very true , ” replied Elizabeth ’s , “ and Elizabeth ’s could easily forgive Sir William Lucas pride , if Sir William Lucas had not mortified Elizabeth ’s . ” 
 
  “ Pride , ” observed Mary , who piqued Mary , who piqued upon the solidity of Mary , who piqued reflections , “ is a very common failing , Mary , who piqued believe . By all that Mary , who piqued have ever read , Mary , who piqued am convinced that Pride is very common indeed ; that human nature is particularly prone to Pride , and that there are very few of us who do not cherish a feeling of self - complacency on the score of some quality or other , real or imaginary . Vanity and pride are different things , though Vanity and pride are often used synonymously . A person may be proud without being vain . Pride relates more to our opinion of ourselves , vanity to what our would have others think of our . ” 
 
  “ If a young Lucas , who came with were as rich as Sir William Lucas , ” cried a young Lucas , who came with a young Lucas , who came with sisters , “ a young Lucas , who came with should not care how proud a young Lucas , who came with was . a young Lucas , who came with would keep a pack of foxhounds , and drink a bottle of wine every day . ” 
 
  “ Then a young Lucas , who came with would drink a great deal more than a young Lucas , who came with ought , ” said Mother ; “ and if Mother were to see a young Lucas , who came with at it , Mother should take away a young Lucas , who came with bottle directly . ” a young Lucas , who came with a young Lucas , who came with protested that Mother should not ; Mother continued to declare that Mother would , and the argument ended only with the visit . 
 Chapter 
 
  The ladies of Longbourn soon waited on those of Netherfield . The visit was returned in due form . Miss Bennet ’s pleasing manners grew on the goodwill of Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ; and though the mother was found to be intolerable , and the younger sisters not worth speaking to , a wish of being better acquainted with the younger sisters was expressed towards the two eldest . By Jane this attention was received with the greatest pleasure ; but Elizabeth still saw superciliousness in the two eldest treatment of everybody , hardly excepting even Elizabeth sister , and could not like the two eldest ; though the two eldest kindness to Jane , such as the two eldest kindness to Jane was , had a value as arising in all probability from the influence of the two eldest brother ’s admiration . It was generally evident whenever the two eldest brother ’s and Jane met , that the two eldest brother ’s did admire Jane ; and to Elizabeth it was equally evident that Jane was yielding to the preference which Jane had begun to entertain for the two eldest brother ’s from the first , and was in a way to be very much in love ; but Elizabeth considered with pleasure that it was not likely to be discovered by the world in general , since Jane united with great strength of feeling , a composure of temper and a uniform cheerfulness of manner which would guard Jane from the suspicions of the impertinent . Elizabeth mentioned this to Elizabeth friend Miss Lucas . 
 
  “ It may perhaps be pleasant , ” replied Elizabeth friend Miss Lucas , “ to be able to impose on the public in such a case ; but it is sometimes a disadvantage to be so very guarded . If a woman conceals a woman affection with the same skill from the object of a woman affection , a woman may lose the opportunity of fixing the object of a woman affection ; and it will then be but poor consolation to believe the world equally in the dark . There is so much of gratitude or vanity in almost every attachment , that it is not safe to leave any to itself . We can all begin freely — a slight preference is natural enough ; but there are very few of us who have heart enough to be really in love without encouragement . In nine cases out of ten , a woman had better show more affection than a woman feels . the two eldest brother ’s likes Jane undoubtedly ; but the two eldest brother ’s may never do more than like Jane , if Jane does not help the two eldest brother ’s on . ” 
 
  “ But Jane does help the two eldest brother ’s on , as much as Jane nature will allow . If Elizabeth can perceive Jane regard for the two eldest brother ’s , the two eldest brother ’s must be a simpleton indeed not to discover Jane regard for the two eldest brother ’s too . ” 
 
  “ Remember , Elizabeth , that the two eldest brother ’s does not know Jane ’s disposition as Elizabeth do . ” 
 
  “ But if a woman is partial to a man , and does not endeavour to conceal is , a man must find is out . ” 
 
  “ Perhaps a man must , if a man sees enough of a woman . But though the two eldest brother ’s and Jane meet tolerably often , it is never for many hours together ; and as the two eldest brother ’s and Jane always see each other in large mixed parties , it is impossible that every moment should be employed in conversing together . Jane should therefore make the most of every half - hour in which Jane can command the two eldest brother ’s attention . When Jane is secure of the two eldest brother ’s , there will be leisure for falling in love as much as Jane chooses . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth plan is a good one , ” replied Elizabeth , “ where nothing is in question but the desire of being well married ; and if Elizabeth were determined to get a rich husband , or any husband , Elizabeth dare say Elizabeth should adopt Elizabeth plan . But these are not Jane ’s feelings ; Jane is not acting by design . As yet , Jane can not even be certain of the degree of Jane own regard , nor of Jane own regard reasonableness . Jane has known the two eldest brother ’s only a fortnight . Jane danced four dances with the two eldest brother ’s at Meryton ; Jane saw the two eldest brother ’s one morning at the two eldest brother ’s own house , and has since dined in company with the two eldest brother ’s four times . This is not quite enough to make Jane understand the two eldest brother ’s character . ” 
 
  “ Not as Elizabeth represent it . Had Jane merely dined with the two eldest brother ’s , Jane might only have discovered whether the two eldest brother ’s had a good appetite ; but Elizabeth must remember that four evenings have been also spent together — and four evenings may do a great deal . ” 
 
  “ Yes ; these four evenings have enabled the two eldest brother ’s and Jane to ascertain that the two eldest brother ’s and Jane like Vingt - un better than Commerce ; but with respect to any other leading characteristic , Elizabeth do not imagine that much has been unfolded . ” 
 
  “ Well , ” said Elizabeth friend Miss Lucas , “ Elizabeth friend Miss Lucas wish Jane success with all Elizabeth friend Miss Lucas heart ; and if Jane were married to the two eldest brother ’s to - morrow , Elizabeth friend Miss Lucas should think Jane had as good a chance of happiness as if Jane were to be studying the two eldest brother ’s character for a twelvemonth . Happiness in marriage is entirely a matter of chance . If the dispositions of the parties are ever so well known to each other , or ever so similar beforehand , are does not advance the parties felicity in the least . the parties always continue to grow sufficiently unlike afterwards to have the parties share of vexation ; and it is better to know as little as possible of the defects of the person with whom you are to pass your life . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth friend Miss Lucas make the two eldest brother ’s laugh , Elizabeth friend Miss Lucas ; but it is not sound . Elizabeth friend Miss Lucas know it is not sound , and that Elizabeth friend Miss Lucas would never act in this way Elizabeth friend Miss Lucas . ” 
 
  Occupied in observing the two eldest brother ’s attentions to Jane , Elizabeth was far from suspecting that Elizabeth was Elizabeth becoming an object of some interest in the eyes of his friend . his friend had at first scarcely allowed Elizabeth to be pretty ; his friend had looked at Elizabeth without admiration at the ball ; and when the two eldest brother ’s and Jane next met , his friend looked at Elizabeth only to criticise . But no sooner had his friend made it clear to his friend and his friend friends that Elizabeth had hardly a good feature in Elizabeth face , than his friend began to find Elizabeth face was rendered uncommonly intelligent by the beautiful expression of Elizabeth dark eyes . To this discovery succeeded some others equally mortifying . Though his friend had detected with a critical eye more than one failure of perfect symmetry in Elizabeth form , his friend was forced to acknowledge Elizabeth figure to be light and pleasing ; and in spite of his friend asserting that Elizabeth manners were not those of the fashionable world , his friend was caught by Elizabeth manners easy playfulness . Of this Elizabeth was perfectly unaware;—to Elizabeth his friend was only the man who made his friend agreeable nowhere , and who had not thought Elizabeth handsome enough to dance with . 
 
  his friend began to wish to know more of Elizabeth , and as a step towards conversing with Elizabeth his friend , attended to Elizabeth conversation with others . his friend doing so drew Elizabeth notice . It was at Sir William Lucas ’s , where a large party were assembled . 
 
  “ What does his friend mean , ” said Elizabeth to Elizabeth friend Miss Lucas , “ by listening to Elizabeth conversation with Colonel Forster ? ” 
 
  “ That is a question which his friend only can answer . ” 
 
  “ But if his friend does listening any more Elizabeth shall certainly let his friend know that Elizabeth see what his friend is about . his friend has a very satirical eye , and if Elizabeth do not begin by being impertinent Elizabeth , Elizabeth shall soon grow afraid of his friend . ” 
 
  On his friend approaching the group soon afterwards , though without seeming to have any intention of speaking , Elizabeth defied Elizabeth to mention such a subject to Elizabeth , which immediately provoking Elizabeth to do it , Elizabeth turned to Elizabeth and said , 
 
  “ Did not Elizabeth think , Elizabeth , that Elizabeth expressed Elizabeth uncommonly well just now , when Elizabeth was teasing Colonel Forster to give the group a ball at Meryton ? ” 
 
  “ With great energy ; but it is a subject which always makes a lady energetic . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth are severe on us . ” 
 
  “ It will be Elizabeth turn soon to be teased , ” said Elizabeth . “ Elizabeth am going to open the instrument , Elizabeth , and Elizabeth know what follows . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth are a very strange creature by way of a friend!—always wanting Elizabeth to play and sing before anybody and everybody ! If Elizabeth vanity had taken a musical turn , Elizabeth would have been invaluable ; but as it is , Elizabeth would really rather not sit down before those who must be in the habit of hearing the very best performers . ” On Elizabeth persevering , however , Elizabeth added , “ Very well ; if it must be so , it must . ” And gravely glancing at Elizabeth , “ There is a fine old saying , which everybody here is of course familiar with—‘Keep your breath to cool your porridge,’—and Elizabeth shall keep Elizabeth to swell Elizabeth song . ” 
 
  Elizabeth performance was pleasing , though by no means capital . After a song or two , and before Elizabeth could reply to the entreaties of several that Elizabeth would sing again , Elizabeth was eagerly succeeded at the instrument by Elizabeth sister Mary , who having , in consequence of being the only plain one in the family , worked hard for knowledge and accomplishments , was always impatient for display . 
 
  
 
  had neither genius nor taste ; and though vanity had given 
 
  application , vanity had given 
 
  likewise a pedantic air and conceited manner , which would have injured a higher degree of excellence than 
 
  had reached . Elizabeth , easy and unaffected , had been listened to with much more pleasure , though not playing half so well ; and 
 
  , at the end of a long concerto , was glad to purchase praise and gratitude by Scotch and Irish airs , at the request of 
 
  younger sisters , who with some of the Lucases , and two or three officers , joined eagerly in dancing at one end of the room . Elizabeth Elizabeth stood near the group in silent indignation at such a mode of passing the evening , to the exclusion of all conversation , and was too much engrossed by Elizabeth own thoughts to perceive that Sir William Lucas ’s was Elizabeth neighbour , till Sir William Lucas ’s thus began . 
 
  “ What a charming amusement for young people this is , Elizabeth ! There is nothing like dancing after all . sir consider dancing as one of the first refinements of polished societies . ” 
 
  “ Certainly , sir ; and this has the advantage also of being in vogue amongst the less polished societies of the world.—Every savage can dance . ” 
 
  Sir William Lucas ’s only smiled . “ his friend performs delightfully , ” sir continued after a pause , on seeing the two eldest brother ’s join the group ; “ and sir doubt not that Elizabeth are an adept in the science Elizabeth , Elizabeth . Elizabeth 
 
  “ sir saw Elizabeth dance at Meryton , Elizabeth believe , sir . ” 
 
  “ Yes , indeed , and received no inconsiderable pleasure from the sight . Do Elizabeth often dance at St. James ’s ? ” 
 
  “ Never , sir . ” 
 
  “ Do Elizabeth not think it would be a proper compliment to St. James ’s ? ” 
 
  “ It is a compliment which Elizabeth never pay to any place if Elizabeth can avoid it . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth have a house in town , sir conclude ? ” 
 
  Elizabeth bowed . 
 
  “ Elizabeth had once some thoughts of fixing in town Elizabeth — for Elizabeth am fond of superior society ; but Elizabeth did not feel quite certain that the air of town would agree with Elizabeth . ” 
 
  Elizabeth paused in hopes of an answer ; but Elizabeth was not disposed to make any ; and Elizabeth at that instant moving towards the group , Elizabeth was struck with the notion of doing a very gallant thing , and called out to Elizabeth , 
 
  “ Elizabeth dear Elizabeth , why are not Elizabeth dancing ? Elizabeth , Elizabeth must allow Elizabeth to present Jane to Elizabeth as a very desirable partner . Elizabeth can not refuse to dance , Elizabeth am sure , when so much beauty is before Elizabeth . ” And , taking Elizabeth hand , Elizabeth would have given Elizabeth hand to Elizabeth , when Elizabeth instantly drew back , and said with some discomposure to Sir William Lucas ’s , 
 
  “ Indeed , Sir William Lucas ’s , Elizabeth have not the least intention of dancing . Elizabeth entreat Sir William Lucas ’s not to suppose that Elizabeth moved this way in order to beg for a partner . ” 
 
  Elizabeth , with grave propriety , requested to be allowed the honour of Elizabeth hand , but in vain . Elizabeth was determined ; nor did Sir William Lucas ’s at all shake Elizabeth purpose by Elizabeth attempt at persuasion . 
 
  “ Elizabeth excel so much in the dance , Elizabeth , that it is cruel to deny Elizabeth the happiness of seeing Elizabeth ; and though Elizabeth dislikes the amusement in general , Elizabeth can have no objection , Elizabeth am sure , to oblige us for one half - hour . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth is all politeness , ” said Elizabeth , smiling . 
 
  “ Elizabeth is , indeed — but , considering the inducement , Elizabeth dear Elizabeth , we can not wonder at Elizabeth complaisance ; for who would object to such a partner ? ” 
 
  Elizabeth looked archly , and turned away . Elizabeth resistance had not injured Elizabeth with Elizabeth , and Elizabeth was thinking of Elizabeth with some complacency , when thus accosted by Caroline , 
 
  “ sir can guess the subject of Elizabeth reverie . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth should imagine not . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth are considering how insupportable it would be to pass many evenings in this manner — in such society ; and indeed sir am quite of Elizabeth opinion . sir was never more annoyed ! The insipidity , and yet the noise ; the nothingness , and yet the self - importance of all these people ! What would sir give to hear Elizabeth strictures on all these people ! ” 
 
  “ sir conjecture is totally wrong , Elizabeth assure sir . Elizabeth mind was more agreeably engaged . Elizabeth have been meditating on the very great pleasure which a pair of fine eyes in the face of a pretty woman can bestow . ” 
 
  sir immediately fixed sir eyes on Elizabeth face , and desired Elizabeth would tell sir what lady had the credit of inspiring such reflections . Elizabeth replied with great intrepidity , 
 
  “ Elizabeth . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth ! ” repeated sir . “ sir am all astonishment . How long has Elizabeth been such a favourite?—and pray when am Elizabeth to wish Elizabeth joy ? ” 
 
  “ That is exactly the question which Elizabeth expected Elizabeth to ask . A lady ’s imagination is very rapid ; A lady ’s imagination jumps from admiration to love , from love to matrimony , in a moment . Elizabeth knew Elizabeth would be wishing Elizabeth joy . ” 
 
  “ Nay , if Elizabeth are so serious about it , Elizabeth shall consider the matter as absolutely settled . Elizabeth will have a charming mother - in - law , indeed , and of course a charming mother - in - law will be always at Pemberley with Elizabeth . ” 
 
  Elizabeth listened to Elizabeth with perfect indifference , while Elizabeth chose to entertain Elizabeth in this manner ; and as Elizabeth composure convinced Elizabeth that all was safe , Elizabeth wit flowed long . 
 Chapter 
 
  Father ’s property consisted almost entirely in an estate of two thousand a year , which , unfortunately for  
 
  Father ’s daughters , was entailed , in default of heirs male , on a distant relation ; and  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s fortune , though ample for  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s situation in life , could but ill supply the deficiency of  
 
  Father ’s .  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s father had been an attorney in Meryton , and had left  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s four thousand pounds . 
 
   
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s had a sister married to a Mr. Phillips , who had been a clerk to  
 
  Father ’s , and succeeded  
 
  Father ’s in the business , and a brother settled in London in a respectable line of trade . 
 
  The village of Longbourn was only one mile from Meryton ; a most convenient distance for the young ladies , who were usually tempted thither three or four times a week , to pay their duty to  
 
  Father ’s daughters aunt and to a milliner ’s shop just over the way . The two youngest of the family , Catherine and Lydia , were particularly frequent in these attentions ; The two youngest of the family , Catherine and Lydia minds were more vacant than The two youngest of the family , Catherine and Lydia , and when nothing better offered , a walk to Meryton was necessary to amuse The two youngest of the family , Catherine and Lydia morning hours and furnish conversation for the evening ; and however bare of news the country in general might be , The two youngest of the family , Catherine and Lydia always contrived to learn some from The two youngest of the family , Catherine and Lydia aunt . At present , indeed , The two youngest of the family , Catherine and Lydia were well supplied both with news and happiness by the recent arrival of a militia regiment in the neighbourhood ; a militia regiment was to remain the whole winter , and Meryton was the headquarters . 
 
  The two youngest of the family , Catherine and Lydia visits to  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s were now productive of the most interesting intelligence . Every day added something to The two youngest of the family , Catherine and Lydia knowledge of the officers ’ names and connections . The two youngest of the family , Catherine and Lydia lodgings were not long a secret , and at length The two youngest of the family , Catherine and Lydia began to know the officers ’ the officers ’ .  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s visited The two youngest of the family , Catherine and Lydia , and visited opened to  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s nieces a source of felicity unknown before . The two youngest of the family , Catherine and Lydia could talk of nothing but officers ; and Charles ’s large fortune , the mention of which gave animation to The two youngest of the family , Catherine and Lydia mother , was worthless in The two youngest of the family , Catherine and Lydia eyes when opposed to the regimentals of an ensign . 
 
  After listening one morning to The two youngest of the family , Catherine and Lydia effusions on this subject , Father coolly observed , 
 
  “ From all that Father can collect by The two youngest of the family , Catherine and Lydia manner of talking , The two youngest of the family , Catherine and Lydia must be two of the silliest girls in the country . Father have suspected be some time , but Father am now convinced . ” 
 
  Catherine was disconcerted , and made no answer ; but Lydia , with perfect indifference , continued to express Lydia admiration of Captain Carter , and Lydia hope of seeing Captain Carter in the course of the day , as Captain Carter was going the next morning to London . 
 
  “  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s am astonished ,  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s dear , ” said  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s , “ that Lydia should be so ready to think Lydia own children silly . If  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s wished to think slightingly of anybody ’s children , anybody ’s children should not be of  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s own , however . ” 
 
  “ If  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s children are silly ,  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s must hope to be always sensible of are . ” 
 
  “ Yes — but as it happens , Lydia own children are all of them very clever . ” 
 
  “ This is the only point ,  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s flatter  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s , on which we do not agree .  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s had hoped that we sentiments coincided in every particular , but  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s must so far differ from Lydia as to think The two youngest of the family , Catherine and Lydia uncommonly foolish . ” 
 
  “ Lydia dear Father , Father must not expect such girls to have the sense of such girls father and mother . When such girls get to our age ,  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s dare say such girls will not think about officers any more than we do .  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s remember the time when  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s liked a red coat  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s very well — and , indeed , so  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s do still at  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s heart ; and if a smart young colonel , with five or six thousand a year , should want one of  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s girls ,  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s shall not say nay to a smart young colonel , with five or six thousand a year ; and  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s thought Colonel Forster looked very becoming the other night at Sir William ’s in Colonel Forster regimentals . ” 
 
  “  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s , ” cried Lydia , “ Lydia aunt says that Colonel Forster and Captain Carter do not go so often to Miss Watson ’s as Colonel Forster and Captain Carter did when Colonel Forster and Captain Carter first came ;  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s sees Colonel Forster and Captain Carter now very often standing in Clarke ’s library . ” 
 
   
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s was prevented replying by the entrance of the footman with a note for Lydia ; a note for Lydia came from Netherfield , and the footman with a note for Lydia waited for an answer .  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s eyes sparkled with pleasure , and  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s was eagerly calling out , while  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s daughter read , 
 
  “ Well , Lydia , who is a note for Lydia from ? What is a note for Lydia about ? What does he say ? Well , Lydia , make haste and tell us ; make haste , Father love . ” 
 
  “ a note for Lydia is from Caroline , ” said Lydia , and then read a note for Lydia aloud . 
 
  “ Father DEAR FRIEND , — 
  “ If Lydia are not so compassionate as to dine to - day with Louisa and Father , we shall be in danger of hating each other for the rest of our lives , for a whole day ’s tête - à - tête between two women can never end without a quarrel . Come as soon as The two youngest of the family , Catherine and Lydia can on the receipt of a note for Lydia . Father brother and the gentlemen are to dine with the officers.—Yours ever , 
 
  “ Caroline ” 
 
  “ With the officers ’ ! ” cried Lydia . “ Lydia wonder  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s did not tell us of that . ” 
 
  “ Dining out , ” said  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s , “ Dining is very unlucky . ” 
 
  “ Can Lydia have the carriage ? ” said Lydia . 
 
  “ No ,  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s dear , Lydia had better go on horseback , because it seems likely to rain ; and then Lydia must stay all night . ” 
 
  “ That would be a good scheme , ” said Elizabeth , “ if  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s were sure that they would not offer to send Lydia home . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! but the gentlemen will have Charles ’s chaise to go to Meryton ; and the Hursts have no horses to the Hursts . ” 
 
  “ Lydia had much rather go in the carriage . ” 
 
  “ But , Lydia , Lydia father can not spare the horses ,  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s am sure . the horses are wanted in the farm , Father , are not the horses ? ” 
 
  “ the horses are wanted in the farm much oftener than Father can get the horses . ” 
 
  “ But if Father have got the horses to - day , ” said Elizabeth , “  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s purpose will be answered . ” 
 
  Elizabeth did at last extort from Elizabeth father an acknowledgment that the horses were engaged . Lydia was therefore obliged to go on horseback , and  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s attended Lydia to the door with many cheerful prognostics of a bad day . Lydia hopes were answered ; Lydia had not been gone long before it rained hard . Lydia sisters were uneasy for Lydia , but Lydia mother was delighted . The rain continued the whole evening without intermission ; Lydia certainly could not come back . 
 
  “ This was a lucky idea of  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s , indeed ! ” said  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s , more than once , as if the credit of making it rain were all  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s own . Till the next morning , however ,  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s was not aware of all the felicity of  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s contrivance . Breakfast was scarcely over when a servant from Netherfield brought the following note for Elizabeth : 
 
  “ Father DEAREST Elizabeth , — 
  “ Father find Father very unwell this morning , which , Father suppose , is to be imputed to Father getting wet through yesterday . Father kind friends will not hear of Father returning home till Father am better . Father kind friends insist also on Father seeing Mr. Jones — therefore do not be alarmed if Father should hear of Mr. Jones having been to Father — and , excepting a sore throat and headache , there is not much the matter with me.—Yours , & c. ” 
 
  “ Well , Elizabeth , ” said Father , when Elizabeth had read a note for Lydia aloud , “ if Lydia should have a dangerous fit of illness — if Lydia should die , it would be a comfort to know that it was all in pursuit of Charles ’s , and under Elizabeth orders . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! Elizabeth am not at all afraid of Lydia dying . People do not die of little trifling colds . Lydia will be taken good care of . As long as Lydia stays there , it is all very well . Elizabeth would go and see Lydia if Elizabeth could have the carriage . ” 
 
  Elizabeth , feeling really anxious , was determined to go to Lydia , though the carriage was not to be had ; and as Elizabeth was no horsewoman , walking was Elizabeth only alternative . Elizabeth declared Elizabeth resolution . 
 
  “ How can Elizabeth be so silly , ” cried Elizabeth mother , “ as to think of such a thing , in all this dirt ! Elizabeth will not be fit to be seen when Elizabeth get there . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth shall be very fit to see Lydia — which is all Elizabeth want . ” 
 
  “ Is this a hint to Father , Elizabeth , ” said Elizabeth father , “ to send for the horses ? ” 
 
  “ No , indeed . Elizabeth do not wish to avoid the walk . The distance is nothing , when one has a motive ; only three miles . Elizabeth shall be back by dinner . ” 
 
  “  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s admire the activity of Elizabeth benevolence , ” observed  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s , “ but every impulse of feeling should be guided by reason ; and , in  
 
  Father ’s daughters mother ’s opinion , exertion should always be in proportion to what is required . ” 
 
  “ Catherine and Lydia will go as far as Meryton with Elizabeth , ” said Catherine and Lydia . Elizabeth accepted Catherine and Lydia company , and The two youngest of the family , Catherine and Lydia set off together . 
 
  “ If we make haste , ” said Lydia , as we walked along , “ perhaps we may see something of Captain Carter before Captain Carter goes . ” 
 
  In Meryton we parted ; Catherine repaired to the lodgings of one of the officers ’ wives , and Elizabeth continued Elizabeth walk alone , crossing field after field at a quick pace , jumping over stiles and springing over puddles with impatient activity , and finding Elizabeth at last within view of the house , with weary ankles , dirty stockings , and a face glowing with the warmth of exercise . 
 
  Elizabeth was shown into the breakfast - parlour , where all but Lydia were assembled , and where Elizabeth appearance created a great deal of surprise . That Elizabeth should have walked three miles so early in the day , in such dirty weather , and by Elizabeth , was almost incredible to Catherine and Lydia ; and Elizabeth was convinced that Catherine and Lydia held Elizabeth in contempt for it . Elizabeth was received , however , very politely by Catherine and Lydia ; and in Catherine and Lydia brother ’s manners there was something better than politeness ; there was good humour and kindness . Fitzwilliam said very little , and Caroline nothing at all . Caroline was divided between admiration of the brilliancy which exercise had given to Elizabeth complexion , and doubt as to the occasion ’s justifying Elizabeth coming so far alone . Caroline was thinking only of Caroline breakfast . 
 
  Caroline enquiries after Caroline sister were not very favourably answered . Lydia had slept ill , and though up , was very feverish , and not well enough to leave Lydia room . Elizabeth was glad to be taken to Lydia immediately ; and Lydia Lydia note how much Lydia longed for such a visit , was delighted at Elizabeth entrance . Lydia was not equal , however , to much conversation , and when Caroline left them together , could attempt little beside expressions of gratitude for the extraordinary kindness Lydia was treated with . Elizabeth silently attended Lydia . 
 
  When breakfast was over , them were joined by Catherine ; and Elizabeth began to like Catherine Elizabeth , when Elizabeth saw how much affection and solicitude Catherine showed for Lydia . The apothecary came , and having examined The apothecary patient , said , as might be supposed , that Lydia had caught a violent cold , and that they must endeavour to get the better of a violent cold ; advised Lydia to return to bed , and promised Lydia some draughts . The advice was followed readily , for the feverish symptoms increased , and Lydia head ached acutely . Elizabeth did not quit Elizabeth room for a moment , nor were the other ladies often absent ; the other ladies being out , The two youngest of the family , Catherine and Lydia had in fact nothing to do elsewhere . 
 
  When the clock struck three , Elizabeth felt that Elizabeth must go , and very unwillingly said so . Caroline offered Elizabeth the carriage , and Elizabeth only wanted a little pressing to accept the carriage , when Lydia testified such concern in parting with Elizabeth , that Caroline was obliged to convert offered to an invitation to remain at Netherfield for the present . Elizabeth most thankfully consented , and a servant was dispatched to The village of Longbourn to acquaint the family with Elizabeth stay , and bring back a supply of clothes . 
 Chapter 
 
  At five o’clock the two ladies retired to dress , and at half - past six Elizabeth was summoned to dinner . To the civil enquiries which then poured in , and amongst which Elizabeth had the pleasure of distinguishing the much superior solicitude of Charles ’s , Elizabeth could not make a very favourable answer . Jane was by no means better . the two ladies , on hearing was , repeated three or four times how much the two ladies were grieved , how shocking it was to have a bad cold , and how excessively the two ladies disliked being ill the two ladies ; and then thought no more of the matter : and the two ladies indifference towards Jane when not immediately before the two ladies , restored Elizabeth to the enjoyment of all Elizabeth original dislike . 
 
  the two ladies brother , indeed , was the only one of the party whom Elizabeth could regard with any complacency . the two ladies brother anxiety for Jane was evident , and the two ladies brother attentions to Jane most pleasing , and the two ladies brother attentions to Jane prevented Elizabeth feeling Elizabeth so much an intruder as Elizabeth believed Elizabeth was considered by the others . Elizabeth had very little notice from any but the two ladies brother . Caroline was engrossed by Fitzwilliam , Caroline sister scarcely less so ; and as for Mr. Hurst , by whom Elizabeth sat , Mr. Hurst , by whom Elizabeth sat was an indolent man , who lived only to eat , drink , and play at cards ; who , when Mr. Hurst , by whom Elizabeth sat found Elizabeth prefer a plain dish to a ragout , had nothing to say to Elizabeth . 
 
  When dinner was over , Elizabeth returned directly to Jane , and Caroline began abusing Elizabeth as soon as Elizabeth was out of the room . Elizabeth manners were pronounced to be very bad indeed , a mixture of pride and impertinence ; Elizabeth had no conversation , no style , no taste , no beauty . Caroline thought the same , and added , 
 
  “ Elizabeth has nothing , in short , to recommend Elizabeth , but being an excellent walker . Caroline shall never forget Elizabeth appearance this morning . Elizabeth really looked almost wild . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth did , indeed , Caroline . Caroline could hardly keep Caroline countenance . Very nonsensical to come at all ! Why must Elizabeth be scampering about the country , because Jane had a cold ? Elizabeth hair so untidy , so blowsy ! ” 
 
  “ Yes , and Elizabeth petticoat ; Caroline hope you saw Elizabeth petticoat , six inches deep in mud , Caroline am absolutely certain ; and the gown which had been let down to hide it not doing its office . ” 
 
  “ Caroline picture may be very exact , Caroline , ” said Charles ; “ but this was all lost upon Charles . Charles thought Miss Elizabeth looked remarkably well when Elizabeth came into the room this morning . Elizabeth dirty petticoat quite escaped Charles notice . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam observed Elizabeth petticoat , Fitzwilliam , Caroline am sure , ” said Caroline ; “ and Caroline am inclined to think that Fitzwilliam would not wish to see Fitzwilliam sister make such an exhibition . ” 
 
  “ Certainly not . ” 
 
  “ To walk three miles , or four miles , or five miles , or whatever it is , above Elizabeth ankles in dirt , and alone , quite alone ! what could Elizabeth mean by walk ? walk seems to me to show an abominable sort of conceited independence , a most country - town indifference to decorum . ” 
 
  “ walk shows an affection for Jane that is very pleasing , ” said Charles . 
 
  “ Caroline am afraid , Fitzwilliam , ” observed Caroline , in a half whisper , “ that this adventure has rather affected Fitzwilliam admiration of Jane fine eyes . ” 
 
  “ Not at all , ” Fitzwilliam replied ; “ Jane fine eyes were brightened by the exercise . ” A short pause followed this speech , and Caroline began again . 
 
  “ Caroline have an excessive regard for Jane , Jane is really a very sweet girl , and Caroline wish with all Caroline heart Jane were well settled . But with such a father and mother , and such low connections , Caroline am afraid there is no chance of were . ” 
 
  “ Caroline think Caroline have heard Fitzwilliam say that their uncle is an attorney in Meryton . ” 
 
  “ Yes ; and their have another , who lives somewhere near Cheapside . ” 
 
  “ That is capital , ” added Jane sister , and they both laughed heartily . 
 
  “ If their had uncles enough to fill all Cheapside , ” cried Charles , “ had would not make their one jot less agreeable . ” 
 
  “ But had must very materially lessen their chance of marrying men of any consideration in the world , ” replied Fitzwilliam . 
 
  To this speech Charles made no answer ; but the two ladies gave this speech the two ladies hearty assent , and indulged the two ladies mirth for some time at the expense of the two ladies dear friend ’s vulgar relations . 
 
  With a renewal of tenderness , however , the two ladies repaired to Elizabeth room on leaving the dining - parlour , and sat with Elizabeth till summoned to coffee . Elizabeth was still very poorly , and Elizabeth would not quit Elizabeth at all , till late in the evening , when Elizabeth had the comfort of seeing Elizabeth asleep , and when it appeared to Elizabeth rather right than pleasant that Elizabeth should go downstairs Elizabeth . On entering the drawing - room Elizabeth found the party at loo , and was immediately invited to join the party ; but suspecting the party to be playing high Elizabeth declined invited , and making Elizabeth the excuse , said Elizabeth would amuse Elizabeth for the short time Elizabeth could stay below , with a book . Caroline looked at Elizabeth with astonishment . 
 
  “ Do Elizabeth prefer reading to cards ? ” said Caroline ; “ prefer is rather singular . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth , ” said Caroline , “ despises cards . Elizabeth is a great reader , and has no pleasure in anything else . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth deserve neither such praise nor such censure , ” cried Elizabeth ; “ Elizabeth am not a great reader , and Elizabeth have pleasure in many things . ” 
 
  “ In nursing Elizabeth Caroline am sure Elizabeth have pleasure , ” said Charles ; “ and Caroline hope pleasure will soon be increased by seeing Elizabeth quite well . ” 
 
  Elizabeth thanked Charles from Elizabeth heart , and then walked towards a table where a few books were lying . Charles immediately offered to fetch Elizabeth others ; all that Charles library afforded . 
 
  “ And Charles wish Charles library were larger for Elizabeth benefit and Charles own credit ; but Charles am an idle fellow , and though Charles have not many , Charles have more than Charles ever looked into . ” 
 
  Elizabeth assured Charles that Elizabeth could suit Elizabeth perfectly with those in the room . 
 
  “ Charles am astonished , ” said Caroline , “ that Charles father should have left so small a collection of books . What a delightful library Fitzwilliam have at Pemberley , Fitzwilliam ! ” 
 
  “ It ought to be good , ” Fitzwilliam replied , “ it has been the work of many generations . ” 
 
  “ And then Fitzwilliam have added so much to it Fitzwilliam , Fitzwilliam are always buying books . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam can not comprehend the neglect of a family library in such days as these . ” 
 
  “ Neglect ! Caroline am sure Fitzwilliam neglect nothing that can add to the beauties of that noble place . Charles , when Charles build Charles house , Elizabeth wish Charles house may be half as delightful as Pemberley . ” 
 
  “ Charles wish Charles house may . ” 
 
  “ But Elizabeth would really advise Charles to make Charles purchase in that neighbourhood , and take Pemberley for a kind of model . There is not a finer county in England than that neighbourhood . ” 
 
  Charles With all Charles heart ; Charles will buy Pemberley Pemberley if Fitzwilliam will sell Pemberley . ” 
 
  “ Caroline am talking of possibilities , Charles . ” 
 
  “ Upon Elizabeth word , Caroline , Elizabeth should think it more possible to get Pemberley by purchase than by imitation . ” Elizabeth Elizabeth was so much caught by what passed , as to leave Elizabeth very little attention for a book ; and soon laying a book wholly aside , Elizabeth drew near the card - table , and stationed Elizabeth between Charles and Charles eldest sister , to observe the game . 
 
  “ Is Georgiana much grown since the spring ? ” said Caroline ; “ will Georgiana be as tall as Caroline am ? ” 
 
  “ Caroline think Georgiana will . Georgiana is now about Elizabeth ’s height , or rather taller . ” 
 
  “ How Caroline long to see Georgiana again ! Caroline never met with anybody who delighted Caroline so much . Such a countenance , such manners!—and so extremely accomplished for Georgiana age ! Georgiana performance on the pianoforte is exquisite . ” 
 
  “ It is amazing to Charles , ” said Charles , “ how young ladies can have patience to be so very accomplished as All young ladies are . ” 
 
  “ All young ladies accomplished ! Caroline dear Charles , what do Charles mean ? ” 
 
  “ Yes , All young ladies , Charles think . All young ladies paint tables , cover screens , and net purses . Charles scarcely know any one who can not do all this , and Charles am sure Charles never heard a young lady spoken of for the first time , without being informed that a young lady was very accomplished . ” 
 
  “ Charles list of the common extent of accomplishments , ” said Fitzwilliam , “ has too much truth . The word is applied to many a woman who deserves it no otherwise than by netting a purse or covering a screen . But Fitzwilliam am very far from agreeing with Charles in Charles estimation of ladies in general . Fitzwilliam can not boast of knowing more than half a dozen , in the whole range of Fitzwilliam acquaintance , that are really accomplished . ” 
 
  “ Nor Caroline , Elizabeth am sure , ” said Caroline . 
 
  “ Then , ” observed Elizabeth , “ Elizabeth must comprehend a great deal in Elizabeth idea of an accomplished woman . ” 
 
  Elizabeth Yes ; Elizabeth do comprehend a great deal in Elizabeth idea of an accomplished woman . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! certainly , ” cried Fitzwilliam faithful assistant , “ no one can be really esteemed accomplished who does not greatly surpass what is usually met with . A woman must have a thorough knowledge of music , singing , drawing , dancing , and the modern languages , to deserve the word ; and besides music , singing , drawing , dancing , and the modern languages , A woman must possess a certain something in A woman air and manner of walking , the tone of A woman voice , A woman address and expressions , or the word will be but half deserved . ” 
 
  “ All this A woman must possess , ” added Fitzwilliam , “ and to all this A woman must yet add something more substantial , in the improvement of A woman mind by extensive reading . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth am no longer surprised at Elizabeth knowing only six accomplished women . Elizabeth rather wonder now at Elizabeth knowing any . ” 
 
  “ Are Elizabeth so severe upon Elizabeth own sex as to doubt the possibility of all this ? ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth never saw such a woman . Elizabeth never saw such capacity , and taste , and application , and elegance , as Fitzwilliam describe , united . ” 
 
  Caroline and Caroline the two ladies cried out against the injustice of Elizabeth implied doubt , and were both protesting that the two ladies knew many women who answered this description , when Caroline called the two ladies to order , with bitter complaints of the two ladies inattention to what was going forward . As all conversation was thereby at an end , Elizabeth soon afterwards left the room . 
 
  “ Elizabeth , ” said Caroline , when the door was closed on Elizabeth , “ is one of those young ladies who seek to recommend themselves to the other sex by undervaluing themselves own ; and with many men , Caroline dare say , seek succeeds . But , in Caroline opinion , seek is a paltry device , a very mean art . ” 
 
  “ Undoubtedly , ” replied Fitzwilliam , to whom this remark was chiefly addressed , “ there is meanness in all the arts which ladies sometimes condescend to employ for captivation . Whatever bears affinity to cunning is despicable . ” 
 
  Caroline was not so entirely satisfied with this reply as to continue the subject . 
 
  Elizabeth joined the two ladies again only to say that Elizabeth was worse , and that Elizabeth could not leave Elizabeth . Charles urged Mr. Jones ’s being sent for immediately ; while Mr. Jones ’s sisters , convinced that no country advice could be of any service , recommended an express to town for one of the most eminent physicians . an express to town for one of the most eminent physicians Elizabeth would not hear of ; but Elizabeth was not so unwilling to comply with Mr. Jones ’s sisters brother ’s proposal ; and it was settled that Mr. Jones ’s should be sent for early in the morning , if Elizabeth were not decidedly better . Charles was quite uncomfortable ; the two ladies declared that the two ladies were miserable . the two ladies solaced the two ladies wretchedness , however , by duets after supper , while Charles could find no better relief to Charles feelings than by giving Charles housekeeper directions that every possible attention might be paid to Elizabeth and Elizabeth sister . 
 
 Chapter 
 
  Elizabeth passed the chief of the night in Elizabeth sister ’s room , and in the morning had the pleasure of being able to send a tolerable answer to the enquiries which Elizabeth very early received from Charles by a housemaid , and some time afterwards from the two elegant ladies who waited on Charles sisters . In spite of this amendment , however , Elizabeth requested to have a note sent to Longbourn , desiring Elizabeth mother to visit Jane , and form Elizabeth own judgment of Jane situation . a note was immediately dispatched , and a note contents as quickly complied with . Elizabeth mother , accompanied by Elizabeth mother two youngest girls , reached Netherfield soon after the family breakfast . 
 
  Had Elizabeth mother found Jane in any apparent danger , Elizabeth mother would have been very miserable ; but being satisfied on seeing Jane that Jane illness was not alarming , Elizabeth mother had no wish of Jane recovering immediately , as Jane restoration to health would probably remove Jane from Netherfield . Elizabeth mother would not listen , therefore , to Elizabeth sister ’s proposal of being carried home ; neither did the apothecary , who arrived about the same time , think Elizabeth sister ’s proposal of being carried home at all advisable . After sitting a little while with Jane , on Caroline ’s appearance and invitation , Elizabeth mother and three daughters all attended Caroline ’s into the breakfast parlour . Charles met Elizabeth mother and three daughters all with hopes that Elizabeth mother had not found Miss Bennet worse than Elizabeth mother expected . 
 
  “ Indeed Elizabeth mother have , Charles , ” was Elizabeth mother answer . “ Miss Bennet is a great deal too ill to be moved . Mr. Jones says we must not think of moving Miss Bennet . We must trespass a little longer on Charles kindness . ” 
 
  “ Removed ! ” cried Charles . “ moving must not be thought of . Elizabeth sister ’s , Elizabeth mother am sure , will not hear of Miss Bennet removal . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth mother may depend upon it , Elizabeth mother , ” said Caroline ’s , with cold civility , “ that Miss Bennet shall receive every possible attention while Miss Bennet remains with Elizabeth mother and three daughters all . ” 
 
  Elizabeth mother was profuse in Elizabeth mother acknowledgments . 
 
  “ Elizabeth mother am sure , ” Elizabeth mother added , “ if it was not for such good friends Elizabeth mother do not know what would become of Miss Bennet , for Miss Bennet is very ill indeed , and suffers a vast deal , though with the greatest patience in the world , which is always the way with Miss Bennet , for Miss Bennet has , without exception , the sweetest temper Elizabeth mother ever met with . Elizabeth mother often tell Elizabeth mother other girls Elizabeth mother other girls are nothing to Miss Bennet . You have a sweet room here , Charles , and a charming prospect over that gravel walk . Elizabeth mother do not know a place in the country that is equal to Netherfield . Charles will not think of quitting Netherfield in a hurry , Elizabeth mother hope , though Charles have but a short lease . ” 
 
  “ Whatever Charles do is done in a hurry , ” replied Charles ; “ and therefore if Charles should resolve to quit Netherfield , Charles should probably be off in five minutes . At present , however , Charles consider Charles as quite fixed here . ” 
 
  “ consider is exactly what Elizabeth mother should have supposed of Charles , ” said Elizabeth . 
 
  “ Elizabeth mother begin to comprehend Elizabeth mother , do Elizabeth mother ? ” cried Charles , turning towards Elizabeth mother . 
 
  “ Oh ! yes — Elizabeth mother understand Elizabeth perfectly . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth mother wish Elizabeth mother might take this for a compliment ; but to be so easily seen through Elizabeth mother am afraid is pitiful . ” 
 
  “ That is as it happens . It does not necessarily follow that a deep , intricate character is more or less estimable than such a one as Elizabeth . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth , ” cried Elizabeth mother , “ remember where Elizabeth are , and do not run on in the wild manner that Elizabeth are suffered to do at home . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth mother did not know before , ” continued Charles immediately , “ that Elizabeth were a studier of character . It must be an amusing study . ” 
 
  “ Yes ; but intricate characters are the most amusing . intricate characters have at least that advantage . ” 
 
  “ The country , ” said Fitzwilliam , “ can in general supply but few subjects for such a study . In a country neighbourhood you move in a very confined and unvarying society . ” 
 
  “ But people people alter so much , that there is something new to be observed in people for ever . ” 
 
  “ Yes , indeed , ” cried Elizabeth mother , offended by Fitzwilliam manner of mentioning a country neighbourhood . “ Elizabeth mother assure Fitzwilliam there is quite as much of that going on in the country as in town . ” 
 
  Everybody was surprised ; and Fitzwilliam , after looking at Elizabeth mother for a moment , turned silently away . Elizabeth mother Elizabeth mother had gained a complete victory over Fitzwilliam , continued Elizabeth mother triumph . 
 
  “ Elizabeth mother can not see that London has any great advantage over the country , for Elizabeth mother part , except the shops and public places . The country is a vast deal pleasanter , is not the country , Charles ? ” 
 
  “ When Charles am in the country , ” Charles replied , “ Charles never wish to leave the country ; and when Elizabeth mother am in town it is pretty much the same . They have each They advantages , and Elizabeth mother can be equally happy in either . ” 
 
  “ Aye — that is because Elizabeth mother have the right disposition . But Fitzwilliam , ” looking at Fitzwilliam , “ seemed to think the country was nothing at all . ” 
 
  “ Indeed , Elizabeth mother , Elizabeth mother are mistaken , ” said Elizabeth , blushing for Elizabeth mother . “ Elizabeth mother quite mistook Fitzwilliam . Fitzwilliam only meant that there was not such a variety of people to be met with in the country as in town , which Elizabeth mother must acknowledge to be true . ” 
 
  “ Certainly , Elizabeth , nobody said there were ; but as to not meeting with many people in this neighbourhood , Elizabeth mother believe there are few neighbourhoods larger . Elizabeth mother know Elizabeth mother and three daughters all dine with four - and - twenty families . ” 
 
  Nothing but concern for Elizabeth could enable Charles to keep Charles countenance . Charles sister was less delicate , and directed Elizabeth eye towards Fitzwilliam with a very expressive smile . Elizabeth , for the sake of saying something that might turn Elizabeth mother ’s thoughts , now asked Elizabeth mother if Charlotte Lucas had been at Longbourn since Charlotte Lucas coming away . 
 
  “ Yes , Charlotte Lucas called yesterday with Charlotte Lucas father . What an agreeable man Charlotte Lucas father is , Charles — is not Charlotte Lucas father ? so much the man of fashion ! So genteel and so easy ! Charlotte Lucas father has always something to say to everybody . That is Elizabeth mother idea of good breeding ; and those persons who fancy those persons who fancy very important and never open those persons who fancy mouths , quite mistake the matter . ” 
 
  “ Did Charlotte Lucas dine with Elizabeth mother ? ” 
 
  “ No , Charlotte Lucas would go home . Elizabeth mother fancy Charlotte Lucas was wanted about the mince - pies . For Elizabeth mother part , Charles , Elizabeth mother always keep servants that can do servants that can do own work ; Elizabeth mother daughters are brought up differently . But everybody is to judge for everybody , and the Lucases are a very good sort of girls , Elizabeth mother assure Charles . It is a pity the Lucases are not handsome ! Not that Elizabeth mother think Charlotte Lucas so very plain — but then Charlotte Lucas is Elizabeth mother and three daughters all particular friend . ” 
 
  “ Charlotte Lucas seems a very pleasant young woman , ” said Charles . 
 
  “ Oh ! dear , yes ; but Charles must own Charlotte Lucas is very plain . Charlotte Lucas Charlotte Lucas has often said so , and envied Elizabeth mother Jane ’s beauty . Elizabeth mother do not like to boast of Elizabeth mother own child , but to be sure , Jane — one does not often see anybody better looking . does is what everybody says . Elizabeth mother do not trust Elizabeth mother own partiality . When Jane was only fifteen , there was a gentleman at Elizabeth mother brother Gardiner ’s in town so much in love with Jane , that Elizabeth mother sister - in - law was sure a gentleman at Elizabeth mother brother Gardiner ’s in town so much in love with Jane would make Jane an offer before we came away . But , however , a gentleman at Elizabeth mother brother Gardiner ’s in town so much in love with Jane did not . Perhaps a gentleman at Elizabeth mother brother Gardiner ’s in town so much in love with Jane thought Jane too young . However , a gentleman at Elizabeth mother brother Gardiner ’s in town so much in love with Jane wrote some verses on Jane , and very pretty some verses were . ” 
 
  “ And so ended a gentleman at Elizabeth mother brother Gardiner ’s in town so much in love with Jane affection , ” said Elizabeth impatiently . “ There has been many a one , Elizabeth fancy , overcome in the same way . Elizabeth wonder who first discovered the efficacy of poetry in driving away love ! ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth mother have been used to consider poetry as the food of love , ” said Fitzwilliam . 
 
  “ Of a fine , stout , healthy love it may . Everything nourishes what is strong already . But if it be only a slight , thin sort of inclination , Elizabeth mother am convinced that one good sonnet will starve it entirely away . ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam only smiled ; and the general pause which ensued made Elizabeth tremble lest Elizabeth mother should be exposing Elizabeth mother again . Elizabeth longed to speak , but could think of nothing to say ; and after a short silence Elizabeth mother began repeating Elizabeth mother thanks to Charles for Charles kindness to Jane , with an apology for troubling Charles also with Elizabeth . Charles was unaffectedly civil in Charles answer , and forced Elizabeth to be civil also , and say what the occasion required . Elizabeth performed Elizabeth part indeed without much graciousness , but Elizabeth mother was satisfied , and soon afterwards ordered Elizabeth mother carriage . Upon this signal , the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls put the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls forward . The two girls had been whispering to each other during the whole visit , and the result of whispering was , that the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls should tax Charles with having promised on Charles first coming into the country to give a ball at Netherfield . 
 
  the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls was a stout , well - grown girl of fifteen , with a fine complexion and good - humoured countenance ; a favourite with the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls mother , whose affection had brought the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls into public at an early age . the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls had high animal spirits , and a sort of natural self - consequence , which the attentions of the officers , to whom the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls uncle ’s good dinners and the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls own easy manners recommended the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls , had increased into assurance . the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls was very equal , therefore , to address Charles on the subject of the ball , and abruptly reminded Charles of Charles promise ; adding , that it would be the most shameful thing in the world if Charles did not keep Charles promise . Charles answer to this sudden attack was delightful to Elizabeth mother ear . 
 
  “ Charles am perfectly ready , Charles assure the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls , to keep Charles engagement ; and when Jane is recovered , the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls shall , if the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls please , name the very day of the ball . But the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls would not wish to be dancing while Jane is ill . the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls 
 
  the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls declared the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls satisfied . “ Oh ! yes — it would be much better to wait till Jane was well , and by that time most likely Captain Carter would be at Meryton again . And when the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls have given the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls ball , ” the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls added , “ the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls shall insist on their giving one also . the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls shall tell Colonel Forster it will be quite a shame if Colonel Forster does not . ” 
 
  the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls and the youngest of Elizabeth mother two youngest girls daughters then departed , and Elizabeth returned instantly to Jane , leaving Elizabeth own and Elizabeth relations ’ behaviour to the remarks of the two elegant ladies who waited on Charles sisters and Fitzwilliam ; the latter of whom , however , could not be prevailed on to join in Elizabeth own and Elizabeth relations ’ censure of Elizabeth , in spite of all Caroline ’s witticisms on fine eyes . 
 Chapter 
 
  The day passed much as the day before had done . Mrs. Hurst and Caroline had spent some hours of the morning with the invalid , who continued , though slowly , to mend ; and in the evening Elizabeth joined Mrs. Hurst and Caroline party in the drawing - room . The loo table , however , did not appear . Fitzwilliam was writing , and Caroline , seated near Fitzwilliam , was watching the progress of Fitzwilliam letter , and repeatedly calling off Fitzwilliam attention by messages to Elizabeth . Mrs. Hurst and Caroline were at piquet , and Mrs. Hurst was observing Mrs. Hurst and Caroline game . Elizabeth Elizabeth took up some needlework , and was sufficiently amused in attending to what passed between Fitzwilliam and Fitzwilliam companion . The perpetual commendations of Elizabeth either on Fitzwilliam handwriting , or on the evenness of Fitzwilliam lines , or on the length of Fitzwilliam letter , with the perfect unconcern with which Elizabeth praises were received , formed a curious dialogue , and was exactly in unison with Elizabeth opinion of each . 
 
  “ How delighted Georgiana will be to receive such a letter ! ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam made no answer . 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam write uncommonly fast . ” 
 
  “ Miss Bennet are mistaken . Fitzwilliam write rather slowly . ” 
 
  “ How many letters Fitzwilliam must have occasion to write in the course of a year ! Letters of business , too ! How odious Miss Bennet should think Letters of business ! ” 
 
  “ It is fortunate , then , that Letters of business fall to Fitzwilliam lot instead of to Miss Bennet . ” 
 
  “ Pray tell Elizabeth that Fitzwilliam long to see Elizabeth . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam have already told Elizabeth so once , by Miss Bennet desire . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam am afraid Fitzwilliam do not like Fitzwilliam pen . Let Fitzwilliam mend Fitzwilliam pen for Fitzwilliam . Fitzwilliam mend pens remarkably well . ” 
 
  “ Thank Fitzwilliam — but Fitzwilliam always mend Fitzwilliam own . ” 
 
  “ How can Fitzwilliam contrive to write so even ? ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam was silent . 
 
  “ Tell Elizabeth Fitzwilliam am delighted to hear of Elizabeth improvement on the harp , and pray let Elizabeth know that Fitzwilliam am quite in raptures with Elizabeth beautiful little design for a table , and Fitzwilliam think Elizabeth beautiful little design for a table infinitely superior to Miss Grantley ’s . ” 
 
  “ Will Fitzwilliam give Fitzwilliam leave to defer Fitzwilliam raptures till Fitzwilliam write again ? At present Fitzwilliam have not room to do Fitzwilliam raptures justice . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! it is of no consequence . Fitzwilliam shall see Elizabeth in January . But do Fitzwilliam always write such charming long letters to Elizabeth , Fitzwilliam ? ” 
 
  “ such charming long letters are generally long ; but whether always charming , it is not for Fitzwilliam to determine . ” 
 
  “ It is a rule with Fitzwilliam , that a person who can write a long letter with ease , can not write ill . ” 
 
  “ That will not do for a compliment to Fitzwilliam , Caroline , ” cried Caroline brother , “ because Fitzwilliam does not write with ease . Fitzwilliam studies too much for words of four syllables . Do not Fitzwilliam , Fitzwilliam ? ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam style of writing is very different from Fitzwilliam . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! ” cried Caroline , “ Charles writes in the most careless way imaginable . Charles leaves out half Charles words , and blots the rest . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam ideas flow so rapidly that Fitzwilliam have not time to express Fitzwilliam ideas — by which means Fitzwilliam letters sometimes convey no ideas at all to Fitzwilliam correspondents . ” 
 
  “ Charles humility , Charles , ” said Elizabeth , “ must disarm reproof . ” 
 
  “ Nothing is more deceitful , ” said Fitzwilliam , “ than the appearance of humility . the appearance of humility is often only carelessness of opinion , and sometimes an indirect boast . ” 
 
  “ And which of the two do Fitzwilliam call Fitzwilliam little recent piece of modesty ? ” 
 
  “ an indirect boast ; for Fitzwilliam are really proud of Fitzwilliam defects in writing , because Fitzwilliam consider Fitzwilliam defects in writing as proceeding from a rapidity of thought and carelessness of execution , which , if not estimable , Fitzwilliam think at least highly interesting . The power of doing anything with quickness is always much prized by the possessor , and often without any attention to the imperfection of the performance . When Fitzwilliam told Mother this morning that if Fitzwilliam ever resolved on quitting Netherfield Fitzwilliam should be gone in five minutes , Fitzwilliam meant told to be a sort of panegyric , of compliment to Fitzwilliam — and yet what is there so very laudable in a precipitance which must leave very necessary business undone , and can be of no real advantage to Fitzwilliam or any one else ? ” 
 
  “ Nay , ” cried Charles , “ this is too much , to remember at night all the foolish things that were said in the morning . And yet , upon Charles honour , Charles believed what Charles said of Charles to be true , and Charles believe it at this moment . At least , therefore , Charles did not assume the character of needless precipitance merely to show off before the ladies . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam dare say Fitzwilliam believed it ; but Fitzwilliam am by no means convinced that Fitzwilliam would be gone with such celerity . Fitzwilliam conduct would be quite as dependent on chance as that of any man Fitzwilliam know ; and if , as Fitzwilliam were mounting Fitzwilliam horse , a friend were to say , ‘ Fitzwilliam , Fitzwilliam had better stay till next week , ’ Fitzwilliam would probably do it , Fitzwilliam would probably not go — and , at another word , might stay a month . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam have only proved by this , ” cried Elizabeth , “ that Charles did not do justice to Charles own disposition . Fitzwilliam have shown Charles off now much more than Charles did Charles . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam am exceedingly gratified , ” said Charles , “ by Elizabeth converting what Fitzwilliam friend says into a compliment on the sweetness of Fitzwilliam temper . But Fitzwilliam am afraid Elizabeth are giving it a turn which a friend did by no means intend ; for a friend would certainly think the better of Fitzwilliam , if under such a circumstance Fitzwilliam were to give a flat denial , and ride off as fast as Fitzwilliam could . ” 
 
  “ Would Fitzwilliam then consider the rashness of Fitzwilliam original intention as atoned for by Fitzwilliam obstinacy in adhering to Fitzwilliam original intention ? ” 
 
  “ Upon Miss Bennet word , Miss Bennet can not exactly explain the matter , Fitzwilliam must speak for Fitzwilliam . ” 
 
  “ Miss Bennet expect Fitzwilliam to account for opinions which Miss Bennet choose to call Fitzwilliam , but which Fitzwilliam have never acknowledged . Allowing the case , however , to stand according to Miss Bennet representation , Miss Bennet must remember , Miss Bennet , that Charles Charles return to the house , and the delay of Charles plan , has merely desired Charles return to the house , asked Charles return to the house without offering one argument in favour of Charles return to the house propriety . ” 
 
  “ To yield readily — easily — to the persuasion of a friend is no merit with Fitzwilliam . ” 
 
  “ To yield without conviction is no compliment to the understanding of either . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam appear to Miss Bennet , Fitzwilliam , to allow nothing for the influence of friendship and affection . A regard for the requester would often make one readily yield to a request , without waiting for arguments to reason one into a request . Miss Bennet am not particularly speaking of such a case as Fitzwilliam have supposed about Charles . We may as well wait , perhaps , till the circumstance occurs , before we discuss the discretion of Charles behaviour thereupon . But in general and ordinary cases between friend and friend , where one of them is desired by the other to change a resolution of no very great moment , should Fitzwilliam think ill of one of them for complying with the desire , without waiting to be argued into the desire ? ” 
 
  “ Will it not be advisable , before we proceed on this subject , to arrange with rather more precision the degree of importance which is to appertain to this request , as well as the degree of intimacy subsisting between the parties ? ” 
 
  “ By all means , ” cried Charles ; “ let us hear all the particulars , not forgetting the parties comparative height and size ; for that will have more weight in the argument , Miss Bennet , than Miss Bennet may be aware of . Charles assure Miss Bennet that if Fitzwilliam were not such a great tall fellow , in comparison with Charles , Charles should not pay Fitzwilliam half so much deference . Charles declare Charles do not know a more awful object than Fitzwilliam , on particular occasions , and in particular places ; at Fitzwilliam own house especially , and of a Sunday evening , when Fitzwilliam has nothing to do . ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam smiled ; but Elizabeth thought Elizabeth could perceive that Fitzwilliam was rather offended , and therefore checked Elizabeth laugh . Caroline warmly resented the indignity Caroline had received , in an expostulation with Caroline brother for talking such nonsense . 
 
  “ I see Charles design , Charles , ” said Fitzwilliam . “ Charles dislike an argument , and want to silence an argument . ” 
 
  “ Perhaps Charles do . Arguments are too much like disputes . If Fitzwilliam and Elizabeth will defer Fitzwilliam till Charles am out of the room , Charles shall be very thankful ; and then Mrs. Hurst and Caroline may say whatever Mrs. Hurst and Caroline like of Charles . ” 
 
  “ What Fitzwilliam ask , ” said Elizabeth , “ is no sacrifice on Elizabeth side ; and Fitzwilliam had much better finish Fitzwilliam letter . ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam took Elizabeth advice , and did finish Fitzwilliam letter . 
 
  When that business was over , Fitzwilliam applied to Mrs. Hurst and Caroline for the indulgence of some music . Caroline moved with alacrity to the pianoforte , and after a polite request that Elizabeth would lead the way , which Elizabeth as politely and more earnestly negatived , Caroline seated Caroline . 
 
  Mrs. Hurst sang with Mrs. Hurst sister , and while they were thus employed , Elizabeth could not help observing , as Elizabeth turned over some music - books that lay on the harp , how frequently Fitzwilliam ’s eyes were fixed on Elizabeth . Elizabeth hardly knew how to suppose that Elizabeth could be an object of admiration to so great a man ; and yet that Fitzwilliam should look at Elizabeth because Fitzwilliam disliked Elizabeth , was still more strange . Elizabeth could only imagine , however , at last , that Elizabeth drew Fitzwilliam notice because there was a something about Elizabeth more wrong and reprehensible , according to Fitzwilliam ideas of right , than in any other person present . The supposition did not pain Elizabeth . Elizabeth liked Fitzwilliam too little to care for Fitzwilliam approbation . 
 
  After playing some Italian songs , Caroline varied the charm by a lively Scotch air ; and soon afterwards Fitzwilliam , drawing near Elizabeth , said to Elizabeth — 
 
  “ Do not Elizabeth feel a great inclination , Elizabeth , to seize such an opportunity of dancing a reel ? ” 
 
  Elizabeth smiled , but made no answer . Fitzwilliam repeated the question , with some surprise at Elizabeth silence . 
 
  “ Oh ! ” said Elizabeth , “ Elizabeth heard Fitzwilliam before ; but Elizabeth could not immediately determine what to say in reply . Fitzwilliam wanted Elizabeth , Elizabeth know , to say ‘ Yes , ’ that Fitzwilliam might have the pleasure of despising Elizabeth taste ; but Fitzwilliam always delight in overthrowing those kind of schemes , and cheating a person of a person premeditated contempt . Elizabeth have , therefore , made up Elizabeth mind to tell Fitzwilliam , that Elizabeth do not want to dance a reel at all — and now despise Elizabeth if Fitzwilliam dare . ” 
 
  “ Indeed Fitzwilliam do not dare . ” 
 
  Elizabeth , having rather expected to affront Fitzwilliam , was amazed at Fitzwilliam gallantry ; but there was a mixture of sweetness and archness in Elizabeth manner which made it difficult for Elizabeth to affront anybody ; and Fitzwilliam had never been so bewitched by any woman as Fitzwilliam was by Elizabeth . Fitzwilliam really believed , that were it not for the inferiority of Elizabeth connections , Fitzwilliam should be in some danger . 
 
  Caroline saw , or suspected enough to be jealous ; and Caroline great anxiety for the recovery of Caroline dear friend Jane received some assistance from Caroline desire of getting rid of Elizabeth . 
 
  Caroline often tried to provoke Fitzwilliam into disliking Fitzwilliam , by talking of their supposed marriage , and planning Fitzwilliam happiness in such an alliance . 
 
  “ Caroline hope , ” said Caroline , as their were walking together in the shrubbery the next day , “ Fitzwilliam will give Fitzwilliam mother - in - law a few hints , when this desirable event takes place , as to the advantage of holding Mother tongue ; and if Fitzwilliam can compass it , do cure the younger girls of running after the officers . And , if Fitzwilliam may mention so delicate a subject , endeavour to check that little something , bordering on conceit and impertinence , which Elizabeth possesses . ” 
 
  “ Have Fitzwilliam anything else to propose for Fitzwilliam domestic felicity ? ” 
 
  “ Oh ! yes . Do let the portraits of Fitzwilliam uncle and aunt Philips be placed in the gallery at Pemberley . Put the portraits of Fitzwilliam uncle and aunt Philips next to Fitzwilliam great uncle the judge . Fitzwilliam uncle and aunt Philips are in the same profession , Fitzwilliam know , only in different lines . As for Fitzwilliam Elizabeth ’s picture , Fitzwilliam must not attempt to have Fitzwilliam Elizabeth ’s picture taken , for what painter could do justice to those beautiful eyes ? ” 
 
  “ It would not be easy , indeed , to catch their expression , but their colour and shape , and the eyelashes , so remarkably fine , might be copied . ” 
 
  At that moment their were met from another walk by Mrs. Hurst and Caroline . 
 
  “ Caroline did not know that Mrs. Hurst and Caroline intended to walk , ” said Caroline , in some confusion , lest their had been overheard . 
 
  “ Elizabeth used Mrs. Hurst abominably ill , ” answered Mrs. Hurst , “ running away without telling Mrs. Hurst that Elizabeth were coming out . ” 
 
  Then taking the disengaged arm of Fitzwilliam , Mrs. Hurst left Elizabeth to walk by Elizabeth . The path just admitted three . Fitzwilliam felt three rudeness , and immediately said , — 
 
  “ The path is not wide enough for three . three had better go into the avenue . ” 
 
  But Elizabeth , who had not the least inclination to remain with three , laughingly answered , 
 
  “ No , no ; stay where three are . three are charmingly grouped , and appear to uncommon advantage . The picturesque would be spoilt by admitting a fourth . Good - bye . ” 
 
  Elizabeth then ran gaily off , rejoicing as Elizabeth rambled about , in the hope of being at home again in a day or two . Jane was already so much recovered as to intend leaving Jane room for a couple of hours that evening . 
 Chapter 
 
  When the ladies removed after dinner , Elizabeth ran up to Elizabeth sister , and seeing Elizabeth sister well guarded from cold , attended Elizabeth sister into the drawing - room , where Elizabeth was welcomed by Elizabeth two friends with many professions of pleasure ; and Elizabeth had never seen them so agreeable as them were during the hour which passed before the gentlemen appeared . them powers of conversation were considerable . them could describe an entertainment with accuracy , relate an anecdote with humour , and laugh at them acquaintance with spirit . 
 
  But when the gentlemen entered , Jane was no longer the first object ; Caroline ’s eyes were instantly turned toward Fitzwilliam , and Caroline ’s had something to say to Fitzwilliam before Fitzwilliam had advanced many steps . Fitzwilliam addressed Fitzwilliam to Miss Bennet , with a polite congratulation ; Mr. Hurst also made Miss Bennet a slight bow , and said Mr. Hurst was “ very glad ; ” but diffuseness and warmth remained for Charles ’s salutation . Charles ’s was full of joy and attention . The first half - hour was spent in piling up the fire , lest Elizabeth sister should suffer from the change of room ; and Elizabeth sister removed at Charles ’s desire to the other side of the fireplace , that Elizabeth sister might be further from the door . Charles ’s then sat down by Elizabeth sister , and talked scarcely to anyone else . Elizabeth , at work in the opposite corner , saw it all with great delight . 
 
  When tea was over , Mr. Hurst reminded Mr. Hurst sister - in - law of the card - table — but in vain . Caroline ’s had obtained private intelligence that Fitzwilliam did not wish for cards ; and Mr. Hurst soon found even Mr. Hurst open petition rejected . Caroline ’s assured Mr. Hurst that no one intended to play , and the silence of the whole party on the subject seemed to justify Caroline ’s . Mr. Hurst had therefore nothing to do , but to stretch Mr. Hurst on one of the sofas and go to sleep . Fitzwilliam took up a book ; Caroline ’s did the same ; and Mrs. Hurst , principally occupied in playing with Caroline ’s bracelets and rings , joined now and then in Caroline ’s brother ’s conversation with Miss Bennet . 
 
  Caroline ’s attention was quite as much engaged in watching Fitzwilliam ’s progress through Fitzwilliam book , as in reading a book ; and Caroline ’s was perpetually either making some enquiry , or looking at Fitzwilliam page . Caroline ’s could not win Fitzwilliam , however , to any conversation ; Fitzwilliam merely answered Caroline ’s question , and read on . At length , quite exhausted by the attempt to be amused with Caroline ’s own book , which Caroline ’s had only chosen because a book was the second volume of Fitzwilliam , Caroline ’s gave a great yawn and said , “ How pleasant it is to spend an evening in this way ! Caroline ’s declare after all there is no enjoyment like reading ! How much sooner one tires of anything than of a book ! When Caroline ’s have a house of Caroline ’s own , Caroline ’s shall be miserable if Caroline ’s have not an excellent library . ” 
 
  No one made any reply . Caroline ’s then yawned again , threw aside a book , and cast Caroline ’s eyes round the room in quest for some amusement ; when hearing Caroline ’s brother mentioning a ball to Miss Bennet Miss Bennet , Caroline ’s turned suddenly towards Caroline ’s brother and said : 
 
  “ By the bye , Caroline ’s brother , are Caroline ’s brother really serious in meditating a dance at Netherfield ? Caroline ’s would advise Caroline ’s brother , before Caroline ’s brother determine on it , to consult the wishes of the present party ; Caroline ’s am much mistaken if there are not some among us to whom a ball would be rather a punishment than a pleasure . ” 
 
  “ If Caroline ’s mean Fitzwilliam , ” cried Caroline ’s brother , “ Fitzwilliam may go to bed , if Fitzwilliam chooses , before a ball to Miss Bennet Miss Bennet begins — but as for a ball to Miss Bennet Miss Bennet , it is quite a settled thing ; and as soon as Nicholls has made white soup enough , Caroline ’s brother shall send round Caroline ’s brother cards . ” 
 
  “ Caroline ’s should like balls infinitely better , ” Caroline ’s replied , “ if balls were carried on in a different manner ; but there is something insufferably tedious in the usual process of such a meeting . It would surely be much more rational if conversation instead of dancing were made the order of the day . ” 
 
  “ Much more rational , Caroline ’s brother dear Caroline , Caroline ’s brother dare say , but conversation would not be near so much like a ball . ” 
 
  Caroline ’s made no answer , and soon afterwards Caroline ’s got up and walked about the room . Caroline ’s figure was elegant , and Caroline ’s walked well ; but Fitzwilliam , at whom it was all aimed , was still inflexibly studious . In the desperation of Caroline ’s feelings , Caroline ’s resolved on one effort more , and , turning to Elizabeth , said : 
 
  “ Elizabeth , let Caroline ’s persuade Elizabeth to follow Caroline ’s example , and take a turn about the room . Caroline ’s assure Elizabeth it is very refreshing after sitting so long in one attitude . ” 
 
  Elizabeth was surprised , but agreed to take immediately . Caroline ’s succeeded no less in the real object of Elizabeth civility ; Fitzwilliam looked up . Fitzwilliam was as much awake to the novelty of attention in that quarter as Elizabeth Elizabeth could be , and unconsciously closed a book . Fitzwilliam was directly invited to join the whole party , but Fitzwilliam declined invited , observing that Fitzwilliam could imagine but two motives for their choosing to walk up and down the room together , with either of which motives Fitzwilliam joining their would interfere . “ What could Fitzwilliam mean ? Caroline ’s was dying to know what could be Fitzwilliam meaning?”—and asked Elizabeth whether Elizabeth could at all understand Fitzwilliam ? 
 
  “ Not at all , ” was Elizabeth answer ; “ but depend upon it , Fitzwilliam means to be severe on their , and their surest way of disappointing Fitzwilliam will be to ask nothing about it . ” 
 
  Caroline ’s , however , was incapable of disappointing Fitzwilliam in anything , and persevered therefore in requiring an explanation of Fitzwilliam two motives . 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam have not the smallest objection to explaining but two motives for their choosing to walk up and down the room together , ” said Fitzwilliam , as soon as Elizabeth allowed Fitzwilliam to speak . “ their either choose this method of passing the evening because their are in each other ’s confidence , and have secret affairs to discuss , or because their are conscious that their figures appear to the greatest advantage in walking ; if the first , Fitzwilliam would be completely in their way , and if the second , Fitzwilliam can admire their much better as Fitzwilliam sit by the fire . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! shocking ! ” cried Caroline ’s . “ Caroline ’s never heard anything so abominable . How shall their punish Fitzwilliam for such a speech ? ” 
 
  “ Nothing so easy , if Fitzwilliam have but the inclination , ” said Elizabeth . “ We can all plague and punish one another . Tease Fitzwilliam — laugh at Fitzwilliam . Intimate as Fitzwilliam are , Fitzwilliam must know how it is to be done . ” 
 
  “ But upon Caroline ’s honour , Caroline ’s do not . Caroline ’s do assure Fitzwilliam that Caroline ’s intimacy has not yet taught Caroline ’s that . Tease calmness of manner and presence of mind ! No , no ; Caroline ’s feel Fitzwilliam may defy their there . And as to laughter , their will not expose their , if Fitzwilliam please , by attempting to laugh without a subject . Fitzwilliam may hug Fitzwilliam . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam is not to be laughed at ! ” cried Elizabeth . “ That is an uncommon advantage , and uncommon Elizabeth hope it will continue , for it would be a great loss to Elizabeth to have many such acquaintances . Elizabeth dearly love a laugh . ” 
 
  “ Caroline ’s , ” said Fitzwilliam , “ has given Fitzwilliam more credit than can be . The wisest and the best of men — nay , the wisest and best of men actions — may be rendered ridiculous by a person whose first object in life is a joke . ” 
 
  “ Certainly , ” replied Elizabeth—“there are such people , but Elizabeth hope Elizabeth am not one of such people . Elizabeth hope Elizabeth never ridicule what is wise and good . Follies and nonsense , whims and inconsistencies , do divert Elizabeth , Elizabeth own , and Elizabeth laugh at Follies and nonsense , whims and inconsistencies whenever Elizabeth can . But Follies and nonsense , whims and inconsistencies , Caroline ’s suppose , are precisely what Fitzwilliam are without . ” 
 
  “ Perhaps that is not possible for anyone . But it has been the study of Elizabeth life to avoid those weaknesses which often expose a strong understanding to ridicule . ” 
 
  “ Such as vanity and pride . ” 
 
  “ Yes , vanity is a weakness indeed . But pride — where there is a real superiority of mind , pride will be always under good regulation . ” 
 
  Elizabeth turned away to hide a smile . 
 
  “ Caroline ’s examination of Fitzwilliam is over , Caroline ’s presume , ” said Caroline ’s ; “ and pray what is the result ? ” 
 
  “ Caroline ’s am perfectly convinced by the result that Fitzwilliam has no defect . Fitzwilliam owns it Fitzwilliam without disguise . ” 
 
  “ No , ” said Fitzwilliam , “ Fitzwilliam have made no such pretension . Fitzwilliam have faults enough , but faults are not , Fitzwilliam hope , of understanding . Fitzwilliam temper Fitzwilliam dare not vouch for . Fitzwilliam temper is , Fitzwilliam believe , too little yielding — certainly too little for the convenience of the world . Fitzwilliam can not forget the follies and vices of others so soon as Fitzwilliam ought , nor others offenses against Fitzwilliam . Fitzwilliam feelings are not puffed about with every attempt to move Fitzwilliam feelings . Fitzwilliam temper would perhaps be called resentful . Fitzwilliam good opinion once lost , is lost forever . ” 
 
  “ That is a failing indeed ! ” cried Elizabeth . “ Implacable resentment is a shade in a character . But Fitzwilliam have chosen Fitzwilliam fault well . Caroline ’s really can not laugh at Fitzwilliam fault . Fitzwilliam are safe from Caroline ’s . ” 
 
  “ There is , Fitzwilliam believe , in every disposition a tendency to some particular evil — a natural defect , which not even the best education can overcome . ” 
 
  “ And Fitzwilliam defect is to hate everybody . ” 
 
  “ And Fitzwilliam , ” Fitzwilliam replied with a smile , “ is willfully to misunderstand them . ” 
 
  “ Do let their have a little music , ” cried Caroline ’s , tired of a conversation in which Caroline ’s had no share . “ Louisa , Louisa will not mind Caroline ’s waking Mr. Hurst ? ” 
 
  Caroline ’s sister had not the smallest objection , and the pianoforte was opened ; and Fitzwilliam , after a few moments ’ recollection , was not sorry for it . Fitzwilliam began to feel the danger of paying Elizabeth too much attention . 
 Chapter
 
  In consequence of an agreement between the sisters , Elizabeth wrote the next morning to the sisters mother , to beg that the carriage might be sent for the sisters in the course of the day . But the sisters mother the sisters mother daughters remaining at Netherfield till the following Tuesday , which would exactly finish Jane ’s week , could not bring the sisters mother to receive the sisters with pleasure before . the sisters mother answer , therefore , was not propitious , at least not to Elizabeth ’s wishes , for Elizabeth was impatient to get home . the sisters mother sent the sisters word that the sisters could not possibly have the carriage before the following Tuesday , which would exactly finish Jane ’s week ; and in the sisters mother postscript it was added , that if Charles and Charles sister pressed the sisters to stay longer , the sisters mother could spare the sisters very well . Against staying longer , however , Elizabeth was positively resolved — nor did Elizabeth much expect it would be asked ; and fearful , on the contrary , as being considered as intruding the sisters needlessly long , Elizabeth urged Jane ’s to borrow the carriage immediately , and at length it was settled that the sisters original design of leaving Netherfield that morning should be mentioned , and borrow made . 
 
  The communication excited many professions of concern ; and enough was said of wishing the sisters to stay at least till the following day to work on Jane ’s ; and till the morrow the sisters going was deferred . Caroline was then sorry that Caroline had proposed the delay , for Caroline jealousy and dislike of one sister much exceeded Caroline affection for the other . 
 
  The master of the house heard with real sorrow that the sisters were to go so soon , and repeatedly tried to persuade Jane ’s that it would not be safe for Jane ’s — that Jane ’s was not enough recovered ; but Jane ’s was firm where Jane ’s felt Jane ’s to be right . 
 
  To Fitzwilliam it was welcome intelligence — Elizabeth had been at Netherfield long enough . Elizabeth attracted Fitzwilliam more than Fitzwilliam liked — and Caroline was uncivil to Elizabeth , and more teasing than usual to Caroline . Caroline wisely resolved to be particularly careful that no sign of admiration should now escape Caroline , nothing that could elevate Elizabeth with the hope of influencing Caroline felicity ; sensible that if such an idea had been suggested , Caroline behaviour during the last day must have material weight in confirming or crushing such an idea . Steady to Caroline purpose , Caroline scarcely spoke ten words to Elizabeth through the whole of Saturday , and though the sisters were at one time left by the sisters for half - an - hour , Caroline adhered most conscientiously to Caroline book , and would not even look at Elizabeth . 
 
  On Sunday , after morning service , the separation , so agreeable to almost all , took place . Caroline ’s civility to Elizabeth increased at last very rapidly , as well as Elizabeth affection for Jane ’s ; and when the sisters parted , after assuring Elizabeth of the pleasure it would always give Elizabeth to see Elizabeth either at Longbourn or Netherfield , and embracing Elizabeth most tenderly , Elizabeth even shook hands with Jane ’s . Elizabeth took leave of the whole party in the liveliest of spirits . 
 
  the sisters were not welcomed home very cordially by the sisters mother . the sisters mother wondered at the sisters coming , and thought the sisters very wrong to give so much trouble , and was sure Jane ’s would have caught cold again . But the sisters father , though very laconic in the sisters father expressions of pleasure , was really glad to see the sisters ; the sisters father had felt the sisters importance in the family circle . The evening conversation , when they were all assembled , had lost much of The evening conversation , when they were all assembled animation , and almost all The evening conversation , when they were all assembled sense by the absence of Jane ’s and Elizabeth . 
 
  They found Mary , as usual , deep in the study of thorough - bass and human nature ; and had some extracts to admire , and some new observations of threadbare morality to listen to . Catherine and Lydia had information for they of a different sort . Much had been done and much had been said in the regiment since the preceding Wednesday ; several of the officers had dined lately with several of the officers uncle , a private had been flogged , and it had actually been hinted that Colonel Forster was going to be married . 
 Chapter 
 
  “ Father hope , Father dear , ” said Father to Father dear , as they were at breakfast the next morning , “ that Father dear have ordered a good dinner to - day , because Father have reason to expect an addition to our family party . ” 
 
  “ Who do Father mean , Father dear ? Father know of nobody that is coming , Father am sure , unless Charlotte Lucas should happen to call in — and Father hope Father dinners are good enough for Charlotte Lucas . Father do not believe Charlotte Lucas often sees such at home . ” 
 
  “ The person of whom Father speak is a gentleman , and a stranger . ” 
 
  Father dear eyes sparkled . “ a gentleman , and a stranger It is Charles , Father am sure ! Well , Father dear am sure Father dear shall be extremely glad to see Charlotte Lucas . But — good Lord ! how unlucky ! There is not a bit of fish to be got to - day . Lydia , Father dear love , ring the bell — Father dear must speak to Father this moment . ” 
 
  “ It is not Charlotte Lucas , ” said Father dear husband ; “ it is The person of whom Father speak . ” 
 
  This roused a general astonishment ; and Father had the pleasure of being eagerly questioned by Father dear and Father five daughters at once . 
 
  After amusing Father some time with Father dear and Father five daughters curiosity , Father thus explained : 
 
  “ About a month ago Father received this letter ; and about a fortnight ago Father answered this letter , for Father thought it a case of some delicacy , and requiring early attention . this letter is from Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as pleases . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! Father , ” cried Father wife , “ Father dear can not bear to hear Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as mentioned . Pray do not talk of Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as . Father dear do think it is the hardest thing in the world , that Father dear estate should be entailed away from Father dear own children ; and Father dear am sure , if Father dear had been Father dear , Father dear should have tried long ago to do something or other about it . ” 
 
  Jane and Elizabeth tried to explain to Father dear the nature of an entail . Jane and Elizabeth had often attempted to do an entail before , but an entail was a subject on which Father dear was beyond the reach of reason , and Father dear continued to rail bitterly against the cruelty of settling Father dear estate away from Father five daughters , in favour of a man whom nobody cared anything about . 
 
  “ It certainly is a most iniquitous affair , ” said Father , “ and nothing can clear Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as from the guilt of inheriting Longbourn . But if Father dear will listen to Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as letter , Father dear may perhaps be a little softened by Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as manner of expressing Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as . ” 
 
  “ No , that Father dear am sure Father dear shall not ; and Father dear think it is very impertinent of Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as to write to Father dear at all , and very hypocritical . Father dear hate such false friends . Why could Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as not keep on quarreling with Father dear , as Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as father did before Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as ? ” 
 
  “ Why , indeed ; Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as does seem to have had some filial scruples on that head , as Father dear will hear . ” 
 
  “ Hunsford , near Westerham , Kent , 15th October . 
 
  “ Father , — 
  “ The disagreement subsisting between Father dear and my late honoured father always gave my much uneasiness , and since my have had the misfortune to lose my late honoured father , my have frequently wished to heal the breach ; but for some time my was kept back by my own doubts , fearing lest it might seem disrespectful to my late honoured father memory for my to be on good terms with anyone with whom it had always pleased my late honoured father to be at variance.—‘There , Father dear . ’—My mind , however , is now made up on the subject , for having received ordination at Easter , my have been so fortunate as to be distinguished by the patronage of the Right Honourable Cathleen , widow of Sir Lewis de Bourgh , whose bounty and beneficence has preferred my to the valuable rectory of this parish , where it shall be my earnest endeavour to demean myself with grateful respect towards her ladyship , and be ever ready to perform those rites and ceremonies which are instituted by the Church of England . As a clergyman , moreover , my feel it my duty to promote and establish the blessing of peace in all families within the reach of my influence ; and on these grounds my flatter myself that my present overtures are highly commendable , and that the circumstance of my being next in the entail of Longbourn estate will be kindly overlooked on Father dear side , and not lead Father dear to reject the offered olive - branch . my can not be otherwise than concerned at being the means of injuring Father dear amiable daughters , and beg leave to apologise for being , as well as to assure Father dear of my readiness to make Father dear amiable daughters every possible amends — but of this hereafter . If Father dear should have no objection to receive my into Father dear house , my propose myself the satisfaction of waiting on Father dear and Father five daughters , Monday , November 18th , by four o’clock , and shall probably trespass on Father dear hospitality till the Saturday se’ennight following , which my can do without any inconvenience , as her ladyship is far from objecting to my occasional absence on a Sunday , provided that some other clergyman is engaged to do the duty of the day.—I remain , Father dear , with respectful compliments to Father dear lady and daughters , Father dear well - wisher and friend , 
 
  “ WILLIAM COLLINS ” 
 
  “ At four o’clock , therefore , Father dear and Father five daughters may expect Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as , ” said Father , as Father folded up this letter . “ Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as seems to be a most conscientious and polite young man , upon Father word , and Father doubt Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as will prove a valuable acquaintance , especially if her ladyship should be so indulgent as to let Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as come to us again . ” 
 
  “ There is some sense in what Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as says about Father dear amiable daughters , however , and if Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as is disposed to make Father dear amiable daughters any amends , Father shall not be the person to discourage Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as . ” 
 
  “ Though it is difficult , ” said Jane , “ to guess in what way Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as can mean to make Father dear amiable daughters the atonement Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as thinks Father dear amiable daughters due , the wish is certainly to Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as credit . ” 
 
  Elizabeth was chiefly struck by Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as extraordinary deference for her ladyship , and Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as kind intention of christening , marrying , and burying Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as parishioners whenever it were required . 
 
  “ Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as must be an oddity , Elizabeth think , ” said Elizabeth . “ Elizabeth can not make Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as out.—There is something very pompous in Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as style.—And what can Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as mean by apologising for being next in the entail?—We can not suppose Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as would help it if Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as could.—Could Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as be a sensible man , Father ? ” 
 
  “ No , Father dear , Father think not . Father have great hopes of finding Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as quite the reverse . There is a mixture of servility and self - importance in Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as letter , which promises well . Father am impatient to see Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as . ” 
 
  “ In point of composition , ” said Mary , “ this letter does not seem defective . The idea of the olive - branch perhaps is not wholly new , yet Father think The idea of the olive - branch is well expressed . ” 
 
  To Jane and Elizabeth , neither this letter nor this letter writer were in any degree interesting . It was next to impossible that Jane and Elizabeth cousin should come in a scarlet coat , and it was now some weeks since Jane and Elizabeth had received pleasure from the society of a man in any other colour . As for Father dear , Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as letter had done away much of Father dear ill - will , and Father dear was preparing to see Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as with a degree of composure which astonished Father dear husband and daughters . 
 
  Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as was punctual to Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as time , and was received with great politeness by the whole family . Father indeed said little ; but Father five daughters were ready enough to talk , and Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as seemed neither in need of encouragement , nor inclined to be silent Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as . Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as was a tall , heavy - looking young man of five - and - twenty . Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as air was grave and stately , and Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as manners were very formal . Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as had not been long seated before Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as complimented Father dear on having so fine a family of daughters ; said Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as had heard much of so fine a family of daughters beauty , but that in this instance fame had fallen short of the truth ; and added , that Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as did not doubt Father dear seeing so fine a family of daughters in due time disposed of in marriage . This gallantry was not much to the taste of some of Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as hearers ; but Father dear , answered most readily . 
 
  “ Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as are very kind , Father dear am sure ; and Father dear wish with all Father dear heart it may prove so , for else so fine a family of daughters will be destitute enough . Things are settled so oddly . ” 
 
  “ Father dear allude , perhaps , to the entail of Longbourn . ” 
 
  “ Ah ! Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as , Father dear do indeed . It is a grievous affair to Father dear poor girls , Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as must confess . Not that Father dear mean to find fault with Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as , for such things Father dear know are all chance in this world . There is no knowing how estates will go when once estates come to be entailed . ” 
 
  “ Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as am very sensible , Father dear , of the hardship to so fine a family of daughters , and could say much on the subject , but that Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as am cautious of appearing forward and precipitate . But Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as can assure so fine a family of daughters that Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as come prepared to admire so fine a family of daughters . At present Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as will not say more ; but , perhaps , when we are better acquainted — ” 
 
  Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as was interrupted by a summons to dinner ; and so fine a family of daughters smiled on each other . so fine a family of daughters were not the only objects of Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as admiration . The hall , the dining - room , and all its furniture , were examined and praised ; and Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as commendation of everything would have touched Father dear heart , but for the mortifying supposition of Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as viewing everything as Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as own future property . The dinner too in The dinner too turn was highly admired ; and Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as begged to know to which of Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as fair cousins the excellency of The dinner too cooking was owing . But Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as was set right there by Mother , who assured Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as with some asperity that they were very well able to keep a good cook , and that Father five daughters had nothing to do in the kitchen . Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as begged pardon for having displeased Father dear . In a softened tone Father dear declared Father dear not at all offended ; but Father cousin , Mr. Collins , who , when Father am dead , may turn Father five daughters out of this house as soon as continued to apologise for about a quarter of an hour . 
 Chapter 
 
  During dinner , Father scarcely spoke at all ; but when the servants were withdrawn , Father thought it time to have some conversation with Father guest , and therefore started a subject in which Father expected Father guest to shine , by observing that Father guest seemed very fortunate in Father guest patroness . Father guest patroness attention to Father guest wishes , and consideration for Father guest comfort , appeared very remarkable . Father could not have chosen better . Father guest was eloquent in Father guest praise . a subject in which Father expected Father guest to shine , by observing that Father guest seemed very fortunate in Father guest patroness elevated Father guest to more than usual solemnity of manner , and with a most important aspect Father guest protested that “ Father guest had never in Father guest life witnessed such behaviour in a person of rank — such affability and condescension , as Father guest had Father guest experienced from Father guest patroness . Father guest patroness had been graciously pleased to approve of both of the discourses which Father guest had already had the honour of preaching before Father guest patroness . Father guest patroness had also asked Father guest twice to dine at Rosings , and had sent for Father guest only the Saturday before , to make up Father guest patroness pool of quadrille in the evening . Father guest patroness was reckoned proud by many people Father guest knew , but Father guest had never seen anything but affability in Father guest patroness . Father guest patroness had always spoken to Father guest as Father guest patroness would to any other gentleman ; Father guest patroness made not the smallest objection to Father guest joining in the society of the neighbourhood nor to Father guest leaving the parish occasionally for a week or two , to visit Father guest relations . Father guest patroness had even condescended to advise Father guest to marry as soon as Father guest could , provided Father guest chose with discretion ; and had once paid Father guest a visit in Father guest humble parsonage , where Father guest patroness had perfectly approved all the alterations Father guest had been making , and had even vouchsafed to suggest some Father guest patroness — some shelves in the closet up stairs . ” 
 
  “ That is all very proper and civil , Mother am sure , ” said Mother , “ and Mother dare say Father guest patroness is a very agreeable woman . It is a pity that great ladies in general are not more like Father guest patroness . Does Father guest patroness live near Father guest , Father guest ? ” 
 
  “ The garden in which stands Father guest humble abode is separated only by a lane from Rosings Park , Father guest patroness residence . ” 
 
  “ Mother think Father guest said Father guest patroness was a widow , Father guest ? Has Father guest patroness any family ? ” 
 
  “ Father guest patroness has only one daughter , the heiress of Rosings , and of very extensive property . ” 
 
  “ Ah ! ” said Mother , shaking Mother head , “ then Father guest patroness is better off than many girls . And what sort of young lady is Father guest patroness ? Is Father guest patroness handsome ? ” 
 
  “ Father guest patroness is a most charming young lady indeed . Father guest patroness Father guest patroness says that , in point of true beauty , Father guest patroness is far superior to the handsomest of Father guest patroness sex , because there is that in Father guest patroness features which marks Father guest patroness . Father guest patroness is unfortunately of a sickly constitution , which has prevented Father guest patroness from making that progress in many accomplishments which Father guest patroness could not have otherwise failed of , as Father guest am informed by the lady who superintended Father guest patroness education , and who still resides with Father guest patroness education . But Father guest patroness is perfectly amiable , and often condescends to drive by Father guest humble abode in Father guest patroness little phaeton and ponies . ” 
 
  “ Has Father guest patroness been presented ? Mother do not remember Father guest patroness name among the ladies at court . ” 
 
  “ Father guest patroness indifferent state of health unhappily prevents Father guest patroness being in town ; and by prevents , as Father guest told Father guest patroness one day , has deprived the British court of the British court brightest ornament . Father guest patroness seemed pleased with the idea ; and Mother may imagine that Father guest am happy on every occasion to offer those little delicate compliments which are always acceptable to ladies . Father guest have more than once observed to Father guest patroness , that Father guest patroness charming daughter seemed born to be a duchess , and that the most elevated rank , instead of giving Father guest patroness consequence , would be adorned by Father guest patroness . These are the kind of little things which please Father guest patroness , and it is a sort of attention which Father guest conceive Father guest peculiarly bound to pay . ” 
 
  “ Father guest judge very properly , ” said Father , “ and it is happy for Father guest that Father guest possess the talent of flattering with delicacy . May Father ask whether these pleasing attentions proceed from the impulse of the moment , or are the result of previous study ? ” 
 
  “ these pleasing attentions arise chiefly from what is passing at the time , and though Father guest sometimes amuse Father guest with suggesting and arranging such little elegant compliments as may be adapted to ordinary occasions , Father guest always wish to give such little elegant compliments as may be adapted to ordinary occasions as unstudied an air as possible . ” 
 
  Father ’s expectations were fully answered . Father cousin was as absurd as Father had hoped , and Father listened to Father cousin with the keenest enjoyment , maintaining at the same time the most resolute composure of countenance , and , except in an occasional glance at Elizabeth , requiring no partner in Father pleasure . 
 
  By tea - time , however , the dose had been enough , and Father was glad to take Father guest into the drawing - room again , and , when tea was over , glad to invite Father guest to read aloud to the ladies . Father guest readily assented , and a book was produced ; but , on beholding a book ( for everything announced a book to be from a circulating library ) , Father guest started back , and begging pardon , protested that Father guest never read novels . Kitty stared at Father guest , and Lydia exclaimed . Other books were produced , and after some deliberation Father guest chose Fordyce ’s Sermons . Lydia gaped as Father guest opened a book , and before Father guest had , with very monotonous solemnity , read three pages , Lydia interrupted Father guest with : 
 
  “ Do Mother know , Mother , that Lydia uncle Phillips talks of turning away Richard ; and if Lydia uncle Phillips does , Colonel Forster will hire Richard . Lydia aunt told Father guest so Lydia aunt on Saturday . Lydia shall walk to Meryton to - morrow to hear more about it , and to ask when Mr. Denny comes back from town . ” 
 
  Lydia was bid by Lydia two eldest sisters to hold Lydia tongue ; but Father guest , much offended , laid aside Father guest book , and said : 
 
  “ Father guest have often observed how little young ladies are interested by books of a serious stamp , though written solely for little young ladies benefit . interested amazes Father guest , Father guest confess ; for , certainly , there can be nothing so advantageous to little young ladies as instruction . But Father guest will no longer importune Father guest young cousin . ” 
 
  Then turning to Father , Father guest offered Father guest as Father antagonist at backgammon . Father accepted the challenge , observing that Father acted very wisely in leaving Lydia two eldest sisters to Lydia two eldest sisters own trifling amusements . Mother and Lydia two eldest sisters apologised most civilly for interrupted , and promised that interrupted should not occur again , if Father guest would resume a book ; but Father guest , after assuring Mother and Lydia two eldest sisters that Father guest bore Father guest young cousin no ill - will , and should never resent Lydia behaviour as any affront , seated Father guest at another table with Father , and prepared for backgammon . 
 Chapter 
 
  William Collins was not a sensible man , and the deficiency of nature had been but little assisted by education or society ; the greatest part of William Collins life having been spent under the guidance of an illiterate and miserly father ; and though William Collins belonged to one of the universities , William Collins had merely kept the necessary terms , without forming at one of the universities any useful acquaintance . The subjection in which William Collins father had brought William Collins up had given William Collins originally great humility of manner ; but great humility of manner was now a good deal counteracted by the self - conceit of a weak head , living in retirement , and the consequential feelings of early and unexpected prosperity . A fortunate chance had recommended William Collins to Cathleen when the living of Hunsford was vacant ; and the respect which William Collins felt for Cathleen high rank , and William Collins veneration for Cathleen as William Collins patroness , mingling with a very good opinion of William Collins , of William Collins authority as a clergyman , and William Collins right as a rector , made William Collins altogether a mixture of pride and obsequiousness , self - importance and humility . 
 
  Having now a good house and a very sufficient income , William Collins intended to marry ; and in seeking a reconciliation with the Longbourn family William Collins had a wife in view , as William Collins meant to choose one of the daughters , if William Collins found the daughters as handsome and amiable as the daughters were represented by common report . William Collins plan was William Collins plan of amends — of atonement — for inheriting the daughters father ’s estate ; and William Collins thought William Collins plan an excellent one , full of eligibility and suitableness , and excessively generous and disinterested on William Collins own part . 
 
  William Collins plan did not vary on seeing the daughters . Miss Bennet ’s lovely face confirmed William Collins views , and established all William Collins strictest notions of what was due to seniority ; and for the first evening Miss Bennet ’s was William Collins settled choice . The next morning , however , made an alteration ; for in a quarter of an hour ’s tête - à - tête with Mother before breakfast , a conversation beginning with William Collins parsonage - house , and leading naturally to the avowal of William Collins hopes , that a mistress might be found for it at Longbourn , produced from Mother , amid very complaisant smiles and general encouragement , a caution against the very Jane William Collins had fixed on . “ As to Mother younger daughters , Mother could not take upon Mother to say — Mother could not positively answer — but Mother did not know of any prepossession ; Mother eldest daughter , Mother must just mention — Mother felt it incumbent on Mother to hint , was likely to be very soon engaged . ” William Collins William Collins had only to change from the very Jane William Collins had fixed on to Elizabeth — and change was soon done — done while Mother was stirring the fire . Elizabeth , equally next to the very Jane William Collins had fixed on in birth and beauty , succeeded the very Jane William Collins had fixed on of course . Mother Mother treasured up the hint , and trusted that Mother might soon have two daughters married ; and the man whom Mother could not bear to speak of the day before was now high in Mother good graces . 
 
  Lydia ’s intention of walking to Meryton was not forgotten ; every sister except Mary agreed to go with Lydia ’s ; and William Collins was to attend the daughters , at the request of Father , who was most anxious to get rid of William Collins , and have Father , who was most anxious to get rid of William Collins , and have library to Father , who was most anxious to get rid of William Collins , and have ; for thither William Collins had followed Father , who was most anxious to get rid of William Collins , and have after breakfast ; and there William Collins would continue , nominally engaged with one of the largest folios in the collection , but really talking to Father , who was most anxious to get rid of William Collins , and have , with little cessation , of Father , who was most anxious to get rid of William Collins , and have house and garden at Hunsford . Such doings discomposed Father , who was most anxious to get rid of William Collins , and have exceedingly . In Father , who was most anxious to get rid of William Collins , and have library Father , who was most anxious to get rid of William Collins , and have had been always sure of leisure and tranquillity ; and though prepared , as Father , who was most anxious to get rid of William Collins , and have told Elizabeth , to meet with folly and conceit in every other room of the house , Father , who was most anxious to get rid of William Collins , and have was used to be free from folly and conceit there ; Father , who was most anxious to get rid of William Collins , and have civility , therefore , was most prompt in inviting William Collins to join the daughters in the daughters walk ; and William Collins , being in fact much better fitted for a walker than a reader , was extremely pleased to close William Collins large book , and go . 
 
  In pompous nothings on William Collins side , and civil assents on that of William Collins cousins , the daughters time passed till the daughters entered Meryton . The attention of the younger ones was then no longer to be gained by William Collins . the younger ones eyes were immediately wandering up in the street in quest of the officers , and nothing less than a very smart bonnet indeed , or a really new muslin in a shop window , could recall the officers . 
 
  But the attention of every lady was soon caught by a young man , whom every lady had never seen before , of most gentlemanlike appearance , walking with another officer on the other side of the way . a young man , whom every lady had never seen before , of most gentlemanlike appearance , walking with another officer on the other side of the way was the very Mr. Denny concerning whose return from London Lydia ’s came to enquire , and a young man , whom every lady had never seen before , of most gentlemanlike appearance , walking with another officer on the other side of the way bowed as the daughters passed . All were struck with a young man , whom every lady had never seen before , of most gentlemanlike appearance , walking with another officer on the other side of the way air , all wondered who a young man , whom every lady had never seen before , of most gentlemanlike appearance , walking with another officer on the other side of the way could be ; and the daughters , determined if possible to find out , led the way across the street , under pretense of wanting something in an opposite shop , and fortunately had just gained the pavement when the officers , turning back , had reached the same spot . Mr. Denny addressed the daughters directly , and entreated permission to introduce Mr. Denny friend , Charlie , who had returned with Mr. Denny the day before from town , and Mr. Denny was happy to say had accepted a commission in the officers corps . This was exactly as it should be ; for a young man , whom every lady had never seen before , of most gentlemanlike appearance , walking with another officer on the other side of the way wanted only regimentals to make a young man , whom every lady had never seen before , of most gentlemanlike appearance , walking with another officer on the other side of the way completely charming . a young man , whom every lady had never seen before , of most gentlemanlike appearance , walking with another officer on the other side of the way appearance was greatly in a young man , whom every lady had never seen before , of most gentlemanlike appearance , walking with another officer on the other side of the way favour ; a young man , whom every lady had never seen before , of most gentlemanlike appearance , walking with another officer on the other side of the way had all the best part of beauty , a fine countenance , a good figure , and very pleasing address . introduce was followed up on a young man , whom every lady had never seen before , of most gentlemanlike appearance , walking with another officer on the other side of the way side by a happy readiness of conversation — a readiness at the same time perfectly correct and unassuming ; and the daughters were still standing and talking together very agreeably , when the sound of horses drew the daughters notice , and Fitzwilliam and Charles were seen riding down the street . On distinguishing the daughters the daughters , the officers came directly towards the daughters , and began the usual civilities . Charles was the principal spokesman , and Miss Bennet ’s the principal object . Charles was then , Charles said , on Charles way to Longbourn on purpose to enquire after Miss Bennet ’s . Fitzwilliam corroborated it with a bow , and was beginning to determine not to fix Fitzwilliam eyes on Elizabeth , when the daughters were suddenly arrested by the sight of a young man , whom every lady had never seen before , of most gentlemanlike appearance , walking with another officer on the other side of the way , and Elizabeth happening to see the countenance of both as both looked at each other , was all astonishment at the effect of the meeting . Both changed colour , one looked white , the other red . Charles , after a few moments , touched Charles hat — a salutation which Fitzwilliam just deigned to return . What could be the meaning of a salutation which Fitzwilliam just deigned to return ? It was impossible to imagine ; it was impossible not to long to know . 
 
  In another minute , Charles , but without seeming to have noticed what passed , took leave and rode on with Charles friend . 
 
  the officers walked with the daughters to the door of Mr. Phillip ’s house , and then made the officers bows , in spite of Lydia ’s pressing entreaties that the daughters should come in , and even in spite of Mr. Phillip ’s throwing up the parlour window and loudly seconding the invitation . 
 
  Mr. Phillip ’s was always glad to see the daughters ; and the two eldest , from the two eldest recent absence , were particularly welcome , and Mr. Phillip ’s was eagerly expressing Mr. Phillip ’s surprise at the two eldest sudden return home , which , as the two eldest own carriage had not fetched the two eldest , Mr. Phillip ’s should have known nothing about , if Mr. Phillip ’s had not happened to see Mr. Jones ’s shop - boy in the street , who had told Mr. Phillip ’s that they were not to send any more draughts to Netherfield because Miss Bennet ’s were come away , when Mr. Phillip ’s civility was claimed towards William Collins by the very Jane William Collins had fixed on introduction of William Collins . Mr. Phillip ’s received William Collins with Mr. Phillip ’s very best politeness , which William Collins returned with as much more , apologising for William Collins intrusion , without any previous acquaintance with Mr. Phillip ’s , which William Collins could not help flattering William Collins , however , might be justified by William Collins relationship to the young ladies who introduced William Collins to Mr. Phillip ’s notice . Mr. Phillip ’s was quite awed by such an excess of good breeding ; but Mr. Phillip ’s contemplation of one stranger was soon put to an end by exclamations and enquiries about the other ; of whom , however , Mr. Phillip ’s could only tell Mr. Phillip ’s nieces what the daughters already knew , that Mr. Denny had brought William Collins from London , and that William Collins was to have a lieutenant ’s commission in the — — shire . Mr. Phillip ’s had been watching William Collins the last hour , Mr. Phillip ’s said , as William Collins walked up and down the street , and had Charles appeared , the daughters would certainly have continued the occupation , but unluckily no one passed windows now except a few of the officers , who , in comparison with William Collins , were become “ stupid , disagreeable fellows . ” Some of the officers , who , in comparison with William Collins , were become “ stupid , disagreeable fellows were to dine with Mr. Phillip ’s the next day , and Mr. Phillip ’s promised to make Mr. Phillip ’s husband call on Charles , and give Charles an invitation also , if the family from Longbourn would come in the evening . come was agreed to , and Mr. Phillip ’s protested that the daughters would have a nice comfortable noisy game of lottery tickets , and a little bit of hot supper afterwards . The prospect of such delights was very cheering , and the daughters parted in mutual good spirits . William Collins repeated William Collins apologies in quitting the room , and was assured with unwearying civility that William Collins apologies were perfectly needless . 
 
  As the daughters walked home , Elizabeth related to the very Jane William Collins had fixed on what Elizabeth had seen pass between the officers ; but though the very Jane William Collins had fixed on would have defended either or both , had the officers appeared to be in the wrong , the very Jane William Collins had fixed on could no more explain such behaviour than Elizabeth . 
 
  William Collins on William Collins return highly gratified Mother by admiring Mr. Phillip ’s manners and politeness . William Collins protested that , except Cathleen and Cathleen daughter , William Collins had never seen a more elegant woman ; for Mr. Phillip ’s had not only received William Collins with the utmost civility , but even pointedly included William Collins in Mr. Phillip ’s invitation for the next evening , although utterly unknown to Mr. Phillip ’s before . Something , William Collins supposed , might be attributed to William Collins connection with the Longbourn family , but yet William Collins had never met with so much attention in the whole course of William Collins life . 
 Chapter 
 
  As no objection was made to the young people ’s engagement with the young people ’s aunt , and all William Collins ’s scruples of leaving Father and Mother for a single evening during William Collins ’s visit were most steadily resisted , the coach conveyed William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s five cousins at a suitable hour to Meryton ; and William Collins ’s five cousins had the pleasure of hearing , as William Collins ’s five cousins entered the drawing - room , that Charlie had accepted William Collins ’s five cousins uncle ’s invitation , and was then in the house . 
 
  When this information was given , and William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s five cousins had all taken William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s five cousins seats , William Collins ’s was at leisure to look around William Collins ’s and admire , and William Collins ’s was so much struck with the size and furniture of the drawing - room , that William Collins ’s declared William Collins ’s might almost have supposed William Collins ’s in the small summer breakfast parlour at Rosings ; declared ; but when Mrs. Phillips understood from William Collins ’s what Rosings was , and who was Rosings proprietor — when Mrs. Phillips had listened to the description of only one of Cathleen ’s drawing - rooms , and found that the chimney - piece alone had cost eight hundred pounds , Mrs. Phillips felt all the force of the compliment , and would hardly have resented a comparison with the housekeeper ’s room . 
 
  In describing to Mrs. Phillips all the grandeur of Cathleen ’s and Cathleen ’s mansion , with occasional digressions in praise of William Collins ’s own humble abode , and the improvements William Collins ’s own humble abode was receiving , William Collins ’s was happily employed until the gentlemen joined William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s five cousins ; and William Collins ’s found in Mrs. Phillips a very attentive listener , whose opinion of William Collins ’s consequence increased with what Mrs. Phillips heard , and who was resolving to retail it all among Mrs. Phillips neighbours as soon as Mrs. Phillips could . To the girls , who could not listen to William Collins ’s five cousins cousin , and who had nothing to do but to wish for an instrument , and examine William Collins ’s five cousins own indifferent imitations of china on the mantelpiece , the interval of waiting appeared very long . the interval of waiting was over at last , however . The gentlemen did approach , and when Charlie walked into the room , Elizabeth felt that Elizabeth had neither been seeing Charlie before , nor thinking of Charlie since , with the smallest degree of unreasonable admiration . The officers of the — — shire were in general a very creditable , gentlemanlike set , and the best of The officers of the — — shire were of the present party ; but Charlie was as far beyond The officers of the — — shire in person , countenance , air , and walk , as The officers of the — — shire were superior to the broad - faced , stuffy uncle Phillips , breathing port wine , who followed The officers of the — — shire into the room . 
 
  Charlie was the happy man towards whom almost every female eye was turned , and Elizabeth was the happy woman by whom Charlie finally seated Charlie ; and the agreeable manner in which Charlie immediately fell into conversation , though it was only on its being a wet night , made Elizabeth feel that the commonest , dullest , most threadbare topic might be rendered interesting by the skill of the speaker . 
 
  With such rivals for the notice of the fair as Charlie and The officers of the — — shire , William Collins ’s seemed to sink into insignificance ; to the young ladies William Collins ’s certainly was nothing ; but William Collins ’s had still at intervals a kind listener in Mrs. Phillips , and was by Mrs. Phillips watchfulness , most abundantly supplied with coffee and muffin . When the card - tables were placed , William Collins ’s had the opportunity of obliging Mrs. Phillips in turn , by sitting down to whist . 
 
  “ William Collins ’s know little of whist at present , ” said William Collins ’s , “ but William Collins ’s shall be glad to improve William Collins ’s , for in William Collins ’s situation in life — ” Mrs. Phillips was very glad for William Collins ’s compliance , but could not wait for William Collins ’s reason . 
 
  Charlie did not play at whist , and with ready delight was Charlie received at the other table between Elizabeth and Lydia . At first there seemed danger of Lydia ’s engrossing Charlie entirely , for Lydia was a most determined talker ; but being likewise extremely fond of lottery tickets , Lydia soon grew too much interested in whist , too eager in making bets and exclaiming after prizes to have attention for anyone in particular . Allowing for the common demands of whist , Charlie was therefore at leisure to talk to Elizabeth , and Elizabeth was very willing to hear Charlie , though what Elizabeth chiefly wished to hear Elizabeth could not hope to be told — the history of Charlie acquaintance with Fitzwilliam . Elizabeth dared not even mention Fitzwilliam . Elizabeth curiosity , however , was unexpectedly relieved . Charlie began the subject Charlie . Charlie enquired how far Netherfield was from Meryton ; and , after receiving Elizabeth answer , asked in a hesitating manner how long Fitzwilliam had been staying there . 
 
  “ About a month , ” said Elizabeth ; and then , unwilling to let the subject drop , added , “ Fitzwilliam is a man of very large property in Derbyshire , Elizabeth understand . ” 
 
  “ Yes , ” replied Charlie ; “ very large property in Derbyshire is a noble one . A clear ten thousand per annum . Elizabeth could not have met with a person more capable of giving Elizabeth certain information on that head than Charlie , for Charlie have been connected with Fitzwilliam family in a particular manner from Charlie infancy . ” Elizabeth Elizabeth could not but look surprised . 
 
  “ Elizabeth may well be surprised , Elizabeth , at such an assertion , after seeing , as Elizabeth probably might , the very cold manner of our meeting yesterday . Are Elizabeth much acquainted with Fitzwilliam ? ” 
 
  “ As much as Elizabeth ever wish to be , ” cried Elizabeth very warmly . “ Elizabeth have spent four days in the same house with Fitzwilliam , and Elizabeth think Fitzwilliam very disagreeable . ” 
 
  “ Charlie have no right to give Charlie opinion , ” said Charlie , “ as to Fitzwilliam being agreeable or otherwise . Charlie am not qualified to form one . Charlie have known Fitzwilliam too long and too well to be a fair judge . It is impossible for Charlie to be impartial . But Charlie believe Elizabeth opinion of Fitzwilliam would in general astonish — and perhaps Elizabeth would not express Elizabeth opinion of Fitzwilliam quite so strongly anywhere else . Here Elizabeth are in Elizabeth own family . ” 
 
  “ Upon Elizabeth word , Elizabeth say no more here than Elizabeth might say in any house in the neighbourhood , except Netherfield . Fitzwilliam is not at all liked in Hertfordshire . Everybody is disgusted with Fitzwilliam pride . You will not find Fitzwilliam more favourably spoken of by anyone . ” 
 
  “ Charlie can not pretend to be sorry , ” said Charlie , after a short interruption , “ that Fitzwilliam or that any man should not be estimated beyond any man deserts ; but with Fitzwilliam Charlie believe it does not often happen . The world is blinded by Fitzwilliam fortune and consequence , or frightened by Fitzwilliam high and imposing manners , and sees Fitzwilliam only as Fitzwilliam chooses to be seen . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth should take Fitzwilliam , even on Elizabeth slight acquaintance , to be an ill - tempered man . ” Charlie only shook Charlie head . 
 
  “ Charlie wonder , ” said Charlie , at the next opportunity of speaking , “ whether Fitzwilliam is likely to be in Hertfordshire much longer . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth do not at all know ; but Elizabeth heard nothing of Fitzwilliam going away when Elizabeth was at Netherfield . Elizabeth hope Elizabeth plans in favour of the — — shire will not be affected by Fitzwilliam being in the neighbourhood . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! no — it is not for Elizabeth to be driven away by Fitzwilliam . If Fitzwilliam wishes to avoid seeing Elizabeth , Fitzwilliam must go . We are not on friendly terms , and it always gives Elizabeth pain to meet Fitzwilliam , but Elizabeth have no reason for avoiding Fitzwilliam but what Elizabeth might proclaim before all the world , a sense of very great ill - usage , and most painful regrets at Fitzwilliam being what Fitzwilliam is . Fitzwilliam father , Miss Bennet , the late Fitzwilliam , was one of the best men that ever breathed , and the truest friend Elizabeth ever had ; and Elizabeth can never be in company with this Fitzwilliam without being grieved to the soul by a thousand tender recollections . Fitzwilliam behaviour to Elizabeth has been scandalous ; but Elizabeth verily believe Elizabeth could forgive Fitzwilliam anything and everything , rather than Fitzwilliam disappointing the hopes and disgracing the memory of Fitzwilliam father . ” 
 
  Elizabeth found the interest of the subject increase , and listened with all Elizabeth heart ; but the delicacy of it prevented further enquiry . Charlie Charlie began to speak on more general topics , Meryton , the neighbourhood , the society , appearing highly pleased with all that Charlie had yet seen , and speaking of the society with gentle but very intelligible gallantry . 
 
  “ It was the prospect of constant society , and good society , ” Charlie added , “ which was Charlie chief inducement to enter the — — shire . Charlie knew it to be a most respectable , agreeable corps , and Charlie friend Denny tempted Charlie further by Charlie friend Denny account of their present quarters , and the very great attentions and excellent acquaintances Meryton had procured their present quarters . Society , Charlie own , is necessary to Charlie . Charlie have been a disappointed man , and Charlie spirits will not bear solitude . Charlie must have employment and society . A military life is not what Charlie was intended for , but circumstances have now made A military life eligible . The church ought to have been Charlie profession — Charlie was brought up for the church , and Charlie should at this time have been in possession of a most valuable living , had a most valuable living pleased Fitzwilliam . ” 
 
  “ Indeed ! ” 
 
  “ Yes — the late Fitzwilliam bequeathed Charlie the next presentation of the best living in Fitzwilliam gift . Fitzwilliam was Charlie godfather , and excessively attached to Charlie . Charlie can not do justice to Fitzwilliam kindness . Fitzwilliam meant to provide for Charlie amply , and thought Fitzwilliam had done it ; but when the living fell , the living was given elsewhere . ” 
 
  “ Good heavens ! ” cried Elizabeth ; “ but how could that be ? How could Fitzwilliam will be disregarded ? Why did Elizabeth not seek legal redress ? ” 
 
  “ There was just such an informality in the terms of the bequest as to give Elizabeth no hope from law . A man of honour could not have doubted the intention , but Fitzwilliam chose to doubt the intention — or to treat the bequest as a merely conditional recommendation , and to assert that Elizabeth had forfeited all claim to the living by extravagance , imprudence — in short anything or nothing . Certain it is , that the living became vacant two years ago , exactly as Elizabeth was of an age to hold the living , and that the living was given to another man ; and no less certain is it , that Elizabeth can not accuse Elizabeth of having really done anything to deserve to lose the living . Elizabeth have a warm , unguarded temper , and Elizabeth may have spoken Elizabeth opinion of Fitzwilliam , and to Fitzwilliam , too freely . Elizabeth can recall nothing worse . But the fact is , that we are very different sort of men , and that Fitzwilliam hates Elizabeth . ” 
 
  “ This is quite shocking ! Fitzwilliam deserves to be publicly disgraced . ” 
 
  “ Some time or other Fitzwilliam will be — but it shall not be by Elizabeth . Till Elizabeth can forget Fitzwilliam father , Elizabeth can never defy or expose Fitzwilliam . ” Elizabeth Elizabeth honoured Elizabeth for such feelings , and thought Elizabeth handsomer than ever as Elizabeth expressed such feelings . 
 
  “ But what , ” said Elizabeth , after a pause , “ can have been Fitzwilliam motive ? What can have induced Fitzwilliam to behave so cruelly ? ” 
 
  “ A thorough , determined dislike of Charlie — a dislike which Elizabeth can not but attribute in some measure to jealousy . Had the late Fitzwilliam liked Charlie less , Fitzwilliam son might have borne with Charlie better ; but Fitzwilliam father , Miss Bennet , the late Fitzwilliam uncommon attachment to Charlie irritated Fitzwilliam , Elizabeth believe , very early in life . Fitzwilliam had not a temper to bear the sort of competition in which we stood — the sort of preference which was often given Charlie . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth had not thought Fitzwilliam so bad as this — though Elizabeth have never liked Fitzwilliam . Elizabeth had not thought so very ill of Fitzwilliam . Elizabeth had supposed Fitzwilliam to be despising Fitzwilliam fellow - creatures in general , but did not suspect Fitzwilliam of descending to such malicious revenge , such injustice , such inhumanity as this . ” 
 
  After a few minutes ’ reflection , however , Elizabeth continued , “ Elizabeth do remember Fitzwilliam boasting one day , at Netherfield , of the implacability of Fitzwilliam resentments , of Fitzwilliam having an unforgiving temper . Fitzwilliam disposition must be dreadful . ” 
 
  “ Charlie will not trust Charlie on the subject , ” replied Charlie ; “ Charlie can hardly be just to Fitzwilliam . ” Elizabeth Elizabeth was again deep in thought , and after a time exclaimed , “ To treat in such a manner Fitzwilliam Fitzwilliam father ! ” Elizabeth could have added , “ A young man , too , like Charlie , whose very countenance may vouch for Charlie being amiable”—but Elizabeth contented Elizabeth with , “ and one , too , who had probably been Fitzwilliam companion from childhood , connected together , as Elizabeth think Charlie said , in the closest manner ! ” 
 
  “ William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s five cousins were born in the same parish , within the same park ; the greatest part of William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s five cousins youth was passed together ; inmates of the same house , sharing the same amusements , objects of the same parental care . Fitzwilliam father , Miss Bennet , the late Fitzwilliam began life in the profession which Charlie uncle , Mr. Phillips , appears to do so much credit to — but Fitzwilliam father , Miss Bennet , the late Fitzwilliam gave up everything to be of use to the late Fitzwilliam and devoted all Fitzwilliam father , Miss Bennet , the late Fitzwilliam time to the care of the Pemberley property . Fitzwilliam father , Miss Bennet , the late Fitzwilliam was most highly esteemed by Fitzwilliam , a most intimate , confidential friend . Fitzwilliam often acknowledged Fitzwilliam to be under the greatest obligations to Charlie father ’s active superintendence , and when , immediately before Fitzwilliam father , Miss Bennet , the late Fitzwilliam death , Fitzwilliam gave Fitzwilliam father , Miss Bennet , the late Fitzwilliam a voluntary promise of providing for Charlie , Charlie am convinced that Fitzwilliam felt a voluntary promise of providing for Charlie to be as much a debt of gratitude to Fitzwilliam father , Miss Bennet , the late Fitzwilliam , as of Fitzwilliam affection to Charlie . ” 
 
  “ How strange ! ” cried Elizabeth . “ How abominable ! Elizabeth wonder that the very pride of this Fitzwilliam has not made Fitzwilliam just to Charlie ! If from no better motive , that Fitzwilliam should not have been too proud to be dishonest — for dishonesty Elizabeth must call it . ” 
 
  “ It is wonderful , ” replied Charlie , “ for almost all Fitzwilliam actions may be traced to pride ; and pride had often been Fitzwilliam best friend . pride has connected Fitzwilliam nearer with virtue than with any other feeling . But we are none of we consistent , and in Fitzwilliam behaviour to Elizabeth there were stronger impulses even than pride . ” 
 
  “ Can such abominable pride as Fitzwilliam have ever done Fitzwilliam good ? ” 
 
  “ Yes . pride has often led Fitzwilliam to be liberal and generous , to give Fitzwilliam money freely , to display hospitality , to assist Fitzwilliam tenants , and relieve the poor . Family pride , and filial pride — for Fitzwilliam is very proud of what Fitzwilliam father was — have done this . Not to appear to disgrace Fitzwilliam family , to degenerate from the popular qualities , or lose the influence of the Pemberley property , is a powerful motive . Fitzwilliam has also brotherly pride , which , with some brotherly affection , makes Fitzwilliam a very kind and careful guardian of Fitzwilliam sister , and you will hear Fitzwilliam generally cried up as the most attentive and best of brothers . ” 
 
  “ What sort of girl is Fitzwilliam sister ? ” 
 
  Charlie shook Charlie head . “ Charlie wish Charlie could call Fitzwilliam sister amiable . It gives Charlie pain to speak ill of a Darcy . But Fitzwilliam sister is too much like Fitzwilliam sister brother — very , very proud . As a child , Fitzwilliam sister was affectionate and pleasing , and extremely fond of Charlie ; and Charlie have devoted hours and hours to Fitzwilliam sister amusement . But Fitzwilliam sister is nothing to Charlie now . Fitzwilliam sister is a handsome girl , about fifteen or sixteen , and , Charlie understand , highly accomplished . Since Fitzwilliam father , Miss Bennet , the late Fitzwilliam death , Fitzwilliam sister home has been London , where a lady lives with Fitzwilliam sister , and superintends Fitzwilliam sister education . ” 
 
  After many pauses and many trials of other subjects , Elizabeth could not help reverting once more to the first , and saying : 
 
  “ Elizabeth am astonished at Fitzwilliam intimacy with Charlie ! How can Charlie , be in friendship with Fitzwilliam ? How can Mr. and Mrs. Phillips suit each other ? Do Elizabeth know Charlie ? ” 
 
  “ Not at all . ” 
 
  “ Charlie is a sweet - tempered , amiable , charming man . Charlie can not know what Fitzwilliam is . ” 
 
  “ Probably not ; but Fitzwilliam can please where Fitzwilliam chooses . Fitzwilliam does not want abilities . Fitzwilliam can be a conversible companion if Fitzwilliam thinks it worth Fitzwilliam while . Among those who are at all Fitzwilliam equals in consequence , Fitzwilliam is a very different man from what Fitzwilliam is to the less prosperous . Fitzwilliam pride never deserts Fitzwilliam ; but with the rich Fitzwilliam is liberal - minded , just , sincere , rational , honourable , and perhaps agreeable — allowing something for fortune and figure . ” 
 
  The whist party soon afterwards breaking up , the players gathered round the other table and William Collins ’s took William Collins ’s station between William Collins ’s cousin Elizabeth and Mrs. Phillips . The usual enquiries as to William Collins ’s success were made by Mrs. Phillips . William Collins ’s success had not been very great ; William Collins ’s had lost every point ; but when Mrs. Phillips began to express Mrs. Phillips concern thereupon , William Collins ’s assured Mrs. Phillips with much earnest gravity that it was not of the least importance , that William Collins ’s considered the money as a mere trifle , and begged that Mrs. Phillips would not make Mrs. Phillips uneasy . 
 
  “ William Collins ’s know very well , Mrs. Phillips , ” said William Collins ’s , “ that when persons sit down to a card - table , persons must take persons chances of these things , and happily William Collins ’s am not in such circumstances as to make five shillings any object . There are undoubtedly many who could not say the same , but thanks to Cathleen ’s , William Collins ’s am removed far beyond the necessity of regarding little matters . ” 
 
  Charlie ’s attention was caught ; and after observing William Collins ’s for a few moments , Charlie asked Elizabeth in a low voice whether Elizabeth relation was very intimately acquainted with the family of de Bourgh . 
 
  “ Cathleen ’s , ” Elizabeth replied , “ has very lately given William Collins ’s a living . Elizabeth hardly know how William Collins ’s was first introduced to Cathleen ’s notice , but William Collins ’s certainly has not known Cathleen ’s long . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth know of course that Cathleen ’s and Lady Anne Darcy were sisters ; consequently that Cathleen ’s is aunt to the present Fitzwilliam . ” 
 
  “ No , indeed , Elizabeth did not . Elizabeth knew nothing at all of Cathleen ’s connections . Elizabeth never heard of Cathleen ’s existence till the day before yesterday . ” 
 
  “ Cathleen ’s , will have a very large fortune , and it is believed that Cathleen ’s and Cathleen ’s cousin will unite the two estates . ” 
 
  This information made Elizabeth smile , as Elizabeth thought of poor Caroline . Vain indeed must be all poor Caroline attentions , vain and useless poor Caroline affection for poor Caroline sister and poor Caroline praise of poor Caroline , if poor Caroline were already self - destined for another . 
 
  “ William Collins ’s , ” said Elizabeth , “ speaks highly both of Cathleen ’s and Cathleen ’s ; but from some particulars that William Collins ’s has related of Cathleen ’s , Elizabeth suspect Fitzwilliam gratitude misleads Fitzwilliam , and that in spite of Cathleen ’s being Fitzwilliam patroness , Cathleen ’s is an arrogant , conceited woman . ” 
 
  “ Charlie believe Cathleen ’s to be both in a great degree , ” replied Charlie ; “ Charlie have not seen Cathleen ’s for many years , but Charlie very well remember that Charlie never liked Cathleen ’s , and that Cathleen ’s manners were dictatorial and insolent . Cathleen ’s has the reputation of being remarkably sensible and clever ; but Charlie rather believe Cathleen ’s derives part of Cathleen ’s abilities from Cathleen ’s rank and fortune , part from Cathleen ’s authoritative manner , and the rest from the pride of Fitzwilliam Fitzwilliam should have an understanding of the first class . ” Elizabeth Elizabeth allowed that Charlie had given a very rational account of it , and they continued talking together , with mutual satisfaction till supper put an end to cards , and gave the rest of the ladies the rest of the ladies share of Charlie ’s attentions . There could be no conversation in the noise of Mrs. Phillips ’s supper party , but Fitzwilliam manners recommended Fitzwilliam to everybody . Whatever Fitzwilliam said , was said well ; and whatever Fitzwilliam did , done gracefully . Elizabeth went away with Elizabeth head full of Fitzwilliam . Elizabeth could think of nothing but of Charlie , and of what Fitzwilliam had told Elizabeth , all the way home ; but there was not time for Elizabeth even to mention Fitzwilliam name as they went , for neither Lydia nor William Collins ’s were once silent . Lydia talked incessantly of lottery tickets , of the fish Lydia had lost and the fish Lydia had won ; and William Collins ’s in describing the civility of Mr. and Mrs. Phillips , protesting that Fitzwilliam did not in the least regard Fitzwilliam losses at whist , enumerating all the dishes at supper , and repeatedly fearing that Fitzwilliam crowded Fitzwilliam cousins , had more to say than Fitzwilliam could well manage before the coach stopped at the house . 
 Chapter 
 
  Elizabeth related to Jane the next day what had passed between Charlie and Elizabeth . Jane listened with astonishment and concern ; Jane knew not how to believe that Charlie could be so unworthy of Charlie regard ; and yet , it was not in Jane nature to question the veracity of a young man of such amiable appearance as George . The possibility of George having endured such unkindness , was enough to interest all Jane tender feelings ; and nothing remained therefore to be done , but to think well of them both , to defend the conduct of each , and throw into the account of accident or mistake whatever could not be otherwise explained . 
 
  “ them both have both , ” said Jane , “ been deceived , Jane dare say , in some way or other , of which we can form no idea . Interested people have perhaps misrepresented each to the other . It is , in short , impossible for us to conjecture the causes or circumstances which may have alienated them both , without actual blame on either side . ” 
 
  “ Very true , indeed ; and now , my dear Jane , what have Jane got to say on behalf of the interested people who have probably been concerned in the business ? Do clear the interested people who have probably been concerned in the business too , or we shall be obliged to think ill of somebody . ” 
 
  “ Laugh as much as Elizabeth choose , but Elizabeth will not laugh Jane out of Jane opinion . My dearest Elizabeth , do but consider in what a disgraceful light it places Charlie , to be treating Charlie father ’s favourite in such a manner , Charlie father ’s favourite . treating is impossible . No man of common humanity , no man who had any value for Charlie character , could be capable of treating . Can Charlie most intimate friends be so excessively deceived in Charlie ? Oh ! no . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth can much more easily believe Charlie being imposed on , than that Charlie should invent such a history of Charlie as Charlie gave Elizabeth last night ; names , facts , everything mentioned without ceremony . If it be not so , let Charlie contradict such a history of Charlie as Charlie gave Elizabeth last night ; names , facts , everything mentioned without ceremony . Besides , there was truth in Charlie looks . ” 
 
  “ It is difficult indeed — it is distressing . One does not know what to think . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth beg Jane pardon ; one knows exactly what to think . ” 
 
  But Jane could think with certainty on only one point — that Charlie , if Charlie had been imposed on , would have much to suffer when the affair became public . 
 
  The two young ladies were summoned from the shrubbery , where this conversation passed , by the arrival of the very persons of whom The two young ladies had been speaking ; Charlie and Charlie sisters came to give Charlie and Charlie sisters personal invitation for the long - expected ball at Netherfield , which was fixed for the following Tuesday . The two young ladies were delighted to see Charlie father ’s favourite again , called it an age since The two young ladies had met , and repeatedly asked what Charlie father ’s favourite had been doing with Charlie father ’s favourite since their separation . To the rest of the family The two young ladies paid little attention ; avoiding Mother as much as possible , saying not much to Elizabeth , and nothing at all to the others . The two young ladies were soon gone again , rising from The two young ladies seats with an activity which took The two young ladies brother by surprise , and hurrying off as if eager to escape from Mother ’s civilities . 
 
  The prospect of the long - expected ball at Netherfield , which was fixed for the following Tuesday was extremely agreeable to every female of the family . Mother chose to consider it as given in compliment to Charlie father ’s favourite , and was particularly flattered by receiving the invitation from Charlie , instead of a ceremonious card . Jane pictured to Jane a happy evening in the society of Jane two friends , and the attentions of Jane two friends brother ; and Elizabeth thought with pleasure of dancing a great deal with Charlie , and of seeing a confirmation of everything in Charlie look and behaviour . The happiness anticipated by Catherine and Lydia depended less on any single event , or any particular person , for though Catherine and Lydia each , like Elizabeth , meant to dance half the evening with Charlie , Charlie was by no means the only partner who could satisfy Catherine and Lydia , and a ball was , at any rate , a ball . And even Mary could assure even Mary family that even Mary had no disinclination for it . 
 
  “ While even Mary can have even Mary mornings to even Mary , ” said even Mary , “ it is enough — even Mary think it is no sacrifice to join occasionally in evening engagements . Society has claims on us all ; and even Mary profess even Mary one of those who consider intervals of recreation and amusement as desirable for everybody . ” Elizabeth Elizabeth ’s spirits were so high on this occasion , that though Elizabeth did not often speak unnecessarily to William Collins , Elizabeth could not help asking William Collins whether William Collins intended to accept Charlie and Charlie sisters personal invitation for the long - expected ball at Netherfield , which was fixed for the following Tuesday , and if William Collins did , whether William Collins would think it proper to join in the evening ’s amusement ; and Elizabeth was rather surprised to find that William Collins entertained no scruple whatever on that head , and was very far from dreading a rebuke either from the Archbishop , or Cathleen , by venturing to dance . 
 
  “ William Collins am by no means of the opinion , William Collins assure Elizabeth , ” said William Collins , “ that a ball of this kind , given by a young man of character , to respectable people , can have any evil tendency ; and William Collins am so far from objecting to dancing William Collins , that William Collins shall hope to be honoured with the hands of all William Collins fair cousins in the course of the evening ; and William Collins take this opportunity of soliciting Elizabeth , Miss Elizabeth , for the two first dances especially , a preference which William Collins trust William Collins cousin Jane will attribute to the right cause , and not to any disrespect for William Collins cousin Jane . ” 
 
  Elizabeth felt Elizabeth completely taken in . Elizabeth had fully proposed being engaged by Charlie for the two first dances especially ; and to have William Collins instead ! Elizabeth liveliness had never been worse timed . There was no help for it , however . Charlie ’s happiness and Elizabeth own were perforce delayed a little longer , and William Collins ’s proposal accepted with as good a grace as Elizabeth could . Elizabeth was not the better pleased with William Collins gallantry from the idea William Collins gallantry suggested of something more . It now first struck Elizabeth , that Elizabeth was selected from among Elizabeth sisters as worthy of being mistress of Hunsford Parsonage , and of assisting to form a quadrille table at Rosings , in the absence of more eligible visitors . The idea soon reached to conviction , as Elizabeth observed William Collins increasing civilities toward Elizabeth , and heard William Collins frequent attempt at a compliment on Elizabeth wit and vivacity ; and though more astonished than gratified Elizabeth by this effect of Elizabeth charms , it was not long before Elizabeth mother gave Elizabeth to understand that the probability of their marriage was extremely agreeable to Mother . Elizabeth , however , did not choose to take the hint , being well aware that a serious dispute must be the consequence of any reply . William Collins might never make William Collins ’s proposal , and till William Collins did , it was useless to quarrel about William Collins . 
 
  If there had not been a Netherfield ball to prepare for and talk of , the younger Miss Bennets would have been in a very pitiable state at this time , for from the day of Charlie and Charlie sisters personal invitation for the long - expected ball at Netherfield , which was fixed for the following Tuesday , to the day of the long - expected ball at Netherfield , which was fixed for the following Tuesday , there was such a succession of rain as prevented the younger Miss Bennets walking to Meryton once . No aunt , no officers , no news could be sought after — the very shoe - roses for Netherfield were got by proxy . Even Elizabeth might have found some trial of Elizabeth patience in weather which totally suspended the improvement of Elizabeth acquaintance with Charlie ; and nothing less than a dance on Tuesday , could have made such a Friday , Saturday , Sunday , and Monday endurable to Catherine and Lydia . 
 Chapter 
 
 Till Elizabeth entered the drawing-room at Netherfield, and looked in vain for Charlie among the cluster of red coats there assembled, a doubt of his being present had never occurred to her. The certainty of meeting him had not been checked by any of those recollections that might not unreasonably have alarmed her. She had dressed with more than usual care, and prepared in the highest spirits for the conquest of all that remained unsubdued of his heart, trusting that it was not more than might be won in the course of the evening. But in an instant arose the dreadful suspicion of his being purposely omitted for Fitzwilliam’s pleasure in the Bingleys’ invitation to the officers; and though this was not exactly the case, the absolute fact of his absence was pronounced by his friend Denny, to whom Lydia eagerly applied, and who told them that George had been obliged to go to town on business the day before, and was not yet returned; adding, with a significant smile, “I do not imagine his business would have called him away just now, if he had not wanted to avoid a certain gentleman here.”
 
 This part of his intelligence, though unheard by Lydia, was caught by Elizabeth, and, as it assured her that Fitzwilliam was not less answerable for George’s absence than if her first surmise had been just, every feeling of displeasure against the former was so sharpened by immediate disappointment, that she could hardly reply with tolerable civility to the polite enquiries which he directly afterwards approached to make. Attendance, forbearance, patience with Fitzwilliam, was injury to George. She was resolved against any sort of conversation with him, and turned away with a degree of ill-humour which she could not wholly surmount even in speaking to Charles, whose blind partiality provoked her.
 
 But Elizabeth was not formed for ill-humour; and though every prospect of her own was destroyed for the evening, it could not dwell long on her spirits; and having told all her griefs to Charlotte Lucas, whom she had not seen for a week, she was soon able to make a voluntary transition to the oddities of her cousin, and to point him out to her particular notice. The first two dances, however, brought a return of distress; they were dances of mortification. William Collins, awkward and solemn, apologising instead of attending, and often moving wrong without being aware of it, gave her all the shame and misery which a disagreeable partner for a couple of dances can give. The moment of her release from him was ecstasy.
 
 She danced next with an officer, and had the refreshment of talking of George, and of hearing that he was universally liked. When those dances were over, she returned to Charlotte Lucas, and was in conversation with her, when she found herself suddenly addressed by Fitzwilliam who took her so much by surprise in his application for her hand, that, without knowing what she did, she accepted him. He walked away again immediately, and she was left to fret over her own want of presence of mind; Charlotte tried to console her:
 
 “I dare say you will find him very agreeable.”
 
 “Heaven forbid! That would be the greatest misfortune of all! To find a man agreeable whom one is determined to hate! Do not wish me such an evil.”
 
 When the dancing recommenced, however, and Fitzwilliam approached to claim her hand, Charlotte could not help cautioning her in a whisper, not to be a simpleton, and allow her fancy for George to make her appear unpleasant in the eyes of a man ten times his consequence. Elizabeth made no answer, and took her place in the set, amazed at the dignity to which she was arrived in being allowed to stand opposite to Fitzwilliam, and reading in her neighbours’ looks, their equal amazement in beholding it. They stood for some time without speaking a word; and she began to imagine that their silence was to last through the two dances, and at first was resolved not to break it; till suddenly fancying that it would be the greater punishment to her partner to oblige him to talk, she made some slight observation on the dance. He replied, and was again silent. After a pause of some minutes, she addressed him a second time with:—“It is your turn to say something now, Fitzwilliam. I talked about the dance, and you ought to make some sort of remark on the size of the room, or the number of couples.”
 
 He smiled, and assured her that whatever she wished him to say should be said.
 
 “Very well. That reply will do for the present. Perhaps by and by I may observe that private balls are much pleasanter than public ones. But now we may be silent.”
 
 “Do you talk by rule, then, while you are dancing?”
 
 “Sometimes. One must speak a little, you know. It would look odd to be entirely silent for half an hour together; and yet for the advantage of some, conversation ought to be so arranged, as that they may have the trouble of saying as little as possible.”
 
 “Are you consulting your own feelings in the present case, or do you imagine that you are gratifying mine?”
 
 “Both,” replied Elizabeth archly; “for I have always seen a great similarity in the turn of our minds. We are each of an unsocial, taciturn disposition, unwilling to speak, unless we expect to say something that will amaze the whole room, and be handed down to posterity with all the éclat of a proverb.”
 
 “This is no very striking resemblance of your own character, I am sure,” said he. “How near it may be to mine, I cannot pretend to say. You think it a faithful portrait undoubtedly.”
 
 “I must not decide on my own performance.”
 
 He made no answer, and they were again silent till they had gone down the dance, when he asked her if she and her sisters did not very often walk to Meryton. She answered in the affirmative, and, unable to resist the temptation, added, “When you met us there the other day, we had just been forming a new acquaintance.”
 
 The effect was immediate. A deeper shade of hauteur overspread his features, but he said not a word, and Elizabeth, though blaming herself for her own weakness, could not go on. At length Fitzwilliam spoke, and in a constrained manner said, “Charlie is blessed with such happy manners as may ensure his making friends—whether he may be equally capable of retaining them, is less certain.”
 
 “He has been so unlucky as to lose your friendship,” replied Elizabeth with emphasis, “and in a manner which he is likely to suffer from all his life.”
 
 Fitzwilliam made no answer, and seemed desirous of changing the subject. At that moment, Sir William Lucas appeared close to them, meaning to pass through the set to the other side of the room; but on perceiving Fitzwilliam, he stopped with a bow of superior courtesy to compliment him on his dancing and his partner.
 
 “I have been most highly gratified indeed, my dear sir. Such very superior dancing is not often seen. It is evident that you belong to the first circles. Allow me to say, however, that your fair partner does not disgrace you, and that I must hope to have this pleasure often repeated, especially when a certain desirable event, my dear Elizabeth (glancing at her sister and Charles) shall take place. What congratulations will then flow in! I appeal to Fitzwilliam:—but let me not interrupt you, sir. You will not thank me for detaining you from the bewitching converse of that young lady, whose bright eyes are also upbraiding me.”
 
 The latter part of this address was scarcely heard by Fitzwilliam; but Sir William’s allusion to his friend seemed to strike him forcibly, and his eyes were directed with a very serious expression towards Charles and Jane, who were dancing together. Recovering himself, however, shortly, he turned to his partner, and said, “Sir William’s interruption has made me forget what we were talking of.”
 
 “I do not think we were speaking at all. Sir William could not have interrupted two people in the room who had less to say for themselves. We have tried two or three subjects already without success, and what we are to talk of next I cannot imagine.”
 
 “What think you of books?” said he, smiling.
 
 “Books—oh! no. I am sure we never read the same, or not with the same feelings.”
 
 “I am sorry you think so; but if that be the case, there can at least be no want of subject. We may compare our different opinions.”
 
 “No—I cannot talk of books in a ball-room; my head is always full of something else.”
 
 “The present always occupies you in such scenes—does it?” said he, with a look of doubt.
 
 “Yes, always,” she replied, without knowing what she said, for her thoughts had wandered far from the subject, as soon afterwards appeared by her suddenly exclaiming, “I remember hearing you once say, Fitzwilliam, that you hardly ever forgave, that your resentment once created was unappeasable. You are very cautious, I suppose, as to its being created?”
 
 “I am,” said he, with a firm voice.
 
 “And never allow yourself to be blinded by prejudice?”
 
 “I hope not.”
 
 “It is particularly incumbent on those who never change their opinion, to be secure of judging properly at first.”
 
 “May I ask to what these questions tend?”
 
 “Merely to the illustration of your character,” said she, endeavouring to shake off her gravity. “I am trying to make it out.”
 
 “And what is your success?”
 
 She shook her head. “I do not get on at all. I hear such different accounts of you as puzzle me exceedingly.”
 
 “I can readily believe,” answered he gravely, “that reports may vary greatly with respect to me; and I could wish, Miss Bennet, that you were not to sketch my character at the present moment, as there is reason to fear that the performance would reflect no credit on either.”
 
 “But if I do not take your likeness now, I may never have another opportunity.”
 
 “I would by no means suspend any pleasure of yours,” he coldly replied. She said no more, and they went down the other dance and parted in silence; and on each side dissatisfied, though not to an equal degree, for in Fitzwilliam’s breast there was a tolerably powerful feeling towards her, which soon procured her pardon, and directed all his anger against another.
 
 They had not long separated, when Caroline came towards her, and with an expression of civil disdain accosted her:
 
 “So, Elizabeth, I hear you are quite delighted with George! Your sister has been talking to me about him, and asking me a thousand questions; and I find that the young man quite forgot to tell you, among his other communication, that he was the son of old George, the late Fitzwilliam’s steward. Let me recommend you, however, as a friend, not to give implicit confidence to all his assertions; for as to Fitzwilliam’s using him ill, it is perfectly false; for, on the contrary, he has always been remarkably kind to him, though George has treated Fitzwilliam in a most infamous manner. I do not know the particulars, but I know very well that Fitzwilliam is not in the least to blame, that he cannot bear to hear George mentioned, and that though my brother thought that he could not well avoid including him in his invitation to the officers, he was excessively glad to find that he had taken himself out of the way. His coming into the country at all is a most insolent thing, indeed, and I wonder how he could presume to do it. I pity you, Elizabeth, for this discovery of your favourite’s guilt; but really, considering his descent, one could not expect much better.”
 
 “His guilt and his descent appear by your account to be the same,” said Elizabeth angrily; “for I have heard you accuse him of nothing worse than of being the son of Fitzwilliam’s steward, and of that, I can assure you, he informed me himself.”
 
 “I beg your pardon,” replied Caroline, turning away with a sneer. “Excuse my interference—it was kindly meant.”
 
 “Insolent girl!” said Elizabeth to herself. “You are much mistaken if you expect to influence me by such a paltry attack as this. I see nothing in it but your own wilful ignorance and the malice of Fitzwilliam.” She then sought her eldest sister, who had undertaken to make enquiries on the same subject of Charles. Jane met her with a smile of such sweet complacency, a glow of such happy expression, as sufficiently marked how well she was satisfied with the occurrences of the evening. Elizabeth instantly read her feelings, and at that moment solicitude for George, resentment against his enemies, and everything else, gave way before the hope of Jane’s being in the fairest way for happiness.
 
 “I want to know,” said she, with a countenance no less smiling than her sister’s, “what you have learnt about Charlie. But perhaps you have been too pleasantly engaged to think of any third person; in which case you may be sure of my pardon.”
 
 “No,” replied Jane, “I have not forgotten him; but I have nothing satisfactory to tell you. Charles does not know the whole of his history, and is quite ignorant of the circumstances which have principally offended Fitzwilliam; but he will vouch for the good conduct, the probity, and honour of his friend, and is perfectly convinced that Charlie has deserved much less attention from Fitzwilliam than he has received; and I am sorry to say by his account as well as his sister’s, Charlie is by no means a respectable young man. I am afraid he has been very imprudent, and has deserved to lose Fitzwilliam’s regard.”
 
 “Charles does not know Charlie himself?”
 
 “No; he never saw him till the other morning at Meryton.”
 
 “This account then is what he has received from Fitzwilliam. I am satisfied. But what does he say of the living?”
 
 “He does not exactly recollect the circumstances, though he has heard them from Fitzwilliam more than once, but he believes that it was left to him conditionally only.”
 
 “I have not a doubt of Charles’s sincerity,” said Elizabeth warmly; “but you must excuse my not being convinced by assurances only. Charles’s defense of his friend was a very able one, I dare say; but since he is unacquainted with several parts of the story, and has learnt the rest from that friend himself, I shall venture to still think of both gentlemen as I did before.”
 
 She then changed the discourse to one more gratifying to each, and on which there could be no difference of sentiment. Elizabeth listened with delight to the happy, though modest hopes which Jane entertained of Charles’s regard, and said all in her power to heighten her confidence in it. On their being joined by Charles himself, Elizabeth withdrew to Miss Lucas; to whose enquiry after the pleasantness of her last partner she had scarcely replied, before William Collins came up to them, and told her with great exultation that he had just been so fortunate as to make a most important discovery.
 
 “I have found out,” said he, “by a singular accident, that there is now in the room a near relation of my patroness. I happened to overhear the gentleman himself mentioning to the young lady who does the honours of the house the names of his cousin Cathleen, and of her mother Cathleen. How wonderfully these sort of things occur! Who would have thought of my meeting with, perhaps, a nephew of Cathleen in this assembly! I am most thankful that the discovery is made in time for me to pay my respects to him, which I am now going to do, and trust he will excuse my not having done it before. My total ignorance of the connection must plead my apology.”
 
 “You are not going to introduce yourself to Fitzwilliam!”
 
 “Indeed I am. I shall entreat his pardon for not having done it earlier. I believe him to be Cathleen’s nephew. It will be in my power to assure him that her ladyship was quite well yesterday se’nnight.”
 
 Elizabeth tried hard to dissuade him from such a scheme, assuring him that Fitzwilliam would consider his addressing him without introduction as an impertinent freedom, rather than a compliment to his aunt; that it was not in the least necessary there should be any notice on either side; and that if it were, it must belong to Fitzwilliam, the superior in consequence, to begin the acquaintance. William Collins listened to her with the determined air of following his own inclination, and, when she ceased speaking, replied thus:
 
 “My dear Elizabeth, I have the highest opinion in the world in your excellent judgement in all matters within the scope of your understanding; but permit me to say, that there must be a wide difference between the established forms of ceremony amongst the laity, and those which regulate the clergy; for, give me leave to observe that I consider the clerical office as equal in point of dignity with the highest rank in the kingdom—provided that a proper humility of behaviour is at the same time maintained. You must therefore allow me to follow the dictates of my conscience on this occasion, which leads me to perform what I look on as a point of duty. Pardon me for neglecting to profit by your advice, which on every other subject shall be my constant guide, though in the case before us I consider myself more fitted by education and habitual study to decide on what is right than a young lady like yourself.” And with a low bow he left her to attack Fitzwilliam, whose reception of his advances she eagerly watched, and whose astonishment at being so addressed was very evident. Her cousin prefaced his speech with a solemn bow and though she could not hear a word of it, she felt as if hearing it all, and saw in the motion of his lips the words “apology,” “Hunsford,” and “Cathleen.” It vexed her to see him expose himself to such a man. Fitzwilliam was eyeing him with unrestrained wonder, and when at last William Collins allowed him time to speak, replied with an air of distant civility. William Collins, however, was not discouraged from speaking again, and Fitzwilliam’s contempt seemed abundantly increasing with the length of his second speech, and at the end of it he only made him a slight bow, and moved another way. William Collins then returned to Elizabeth.
 
 “I have no reason, I assure you,” said he, “to be dissatisfied with my reception. Fitzwilliam seemed much pleased with the attention. He answered me with the utmost civility, and even paid me the compliment of saying that he was so well convinced of Cathleen’s discernment as to be certain she could never bestow a favour unworthily. It was really a very handsome thought. Upon the whole, I am much pleased with him.”
 
 As Elizabeth had no longer any interest of her own to pursue, she turned her attention almost entirely on her sister and Charles; and the train of agreeable reflections which her observations gave birth to, made her perhaps almost as happy as Jane. She saw her in idea settled in that very house, in all the felicity which a marriage of true affection could bestow; and she felt capable, under such circumstances, of endeavouring even to like Charles’s two sisters. Her mother’s thoughts she plainly saw were bent the same way, and she determined not to venture near her, lest she might hear too much. When they sat down to supper, therefore, she considered it a most unlucky perverseness which placed them within one of each other; and deeply was she vexed to find that her mother was talking to that one person (Lady Lucas) freely, openly, and of nothing else but her expectation that Jane would soon be married to Charles. It was an animating subject, and Mother seemed incapable of fatigue while enumerating the advantages of the match. His being such a charming young man, and so rich, and living but three miles from them, were the first points of self-gratulation; and then it was such a comfort to think how fond the two sisters were of Jane, and to be certain that they must desire the connection as much as she could do. It was, moreover, such a promising thing for her younger daughters, as Jane’s marrying so greatly must throw them in the way of other rich men; and lastly, it was so pleasant at her time of life to be able to consign her single daughters to the care of their sister, that she might not be obliged to go into company more than she liked. It was necessary to make this circumstance a matter of pleasure, because on such occasions it is the etiquette; but no one was less likely than Mother to find comfort in staying home at any period of her life. She concluded with many good wishes that Lady Lucas might soon be equally fortunate, though evidently and triumphantly believing there was no chance of it.
 
 In vain did Elizabeth endeavour to check the rapidity of her mother’s words, or persuade her to describe her felicity in a less audible whisper; for, to her inexpressible vexation, she could perceive that the chief of it was overheard by Fitzwilliam, who sat opposite to them. Her mother only scolded her for being nonsensical.
 
 “What is Fitzwilliam to me, pray, that I should be afraid of him? I am sure we owe him no such particular civility as to be obliged to say nothing he may not like to hear.”
 
 “For heaven’s sake, madam, speak lower. What advantage can it be for you to offend Fitzwilliam? You will never recommend yourself to his friend by so doing!”
 
 Nothing that she could say, however, had any influence. Her mother would talk of her views in the same intelligible tone. Elizabeth blushed and blushed again with shame and vexation. She could not help frequently glancing her eye at Fitzwilliam, though every glance convinced her of what she dreaded; for though he was not always looking at her mother, she was convinced that his attention was invariably fixed by her. The expression of his face changed gradually from indignant contempt to a composed and steady gravity.
 
 At length, however, Mother had no more to say; and Lady Lucas, who had been long yawning at the repetition of delights which she saw no likelihood of sharing, was left to the comforts of cold ham and chicken. Elizabeth now began to revive. But not long was the interval of tranquillity; for, when supper was over, singing was talked of, and she had the mortification of seeing Mary, after very little entreaty, preparing to oblige the company. By many significant looks and silent entreaties, did she endeavour to prevent such a proof of complaisance, but in vain; Mary would not understand them; such an opportunity of exhibiting was delightful to her, and she began her song. Elizabeth’s eyes were fixed on her with most painful sensations, and she watched her progress through the several stanzas with an impatience which was very ill rewarded at their close; for Mary, on receiving, amongst the thanks of the table, the hint of a hope that she might be prevailed on to favour them again, after the pause of half a minute began another. Mary’s powers were by no means fitted for such a display; her voice was weak, and her manner affected. Elizabeth was in agonies. She looked at Jane, to see how she bore it; but Jane was very composedly talking to Charles. She looked at his two sisters, and saw them making signs of derision at each other, and at Fitzwilliam, who continued, however, imperturbably grave. She looked at her father to entreat his interference, lest Mary should be singing all night. He took the hint, and when Mary had finished her second song, said aloud, “That will do extremely well, child. You have delighted us long enough. Let the other young ladies have time to exhibit.”
 
 Mary, though pretending not to hear, was somewhat disconcerted; and Elizabeth, sorry for her, and sorry for her father’s speech, was afraid her anxiety had done no good. Others of the party were now applied to.
 
 “If I,” said William Collins, “were so fortunate as to be able to sing, I should have great pleasure, I am sure, in obliging the company with an air; for I consider music as a very innocent diversion, and perfectly compatible with the profession of a clergyman. I do not mean, however, to assert that we can be justified in devoting too much of our time to music, for there are certainly other things to be attended to. The rector of a parish has much to do. In the first place, he must make such an agreement for tithes as may be beneficial to himself and not offensive to his patron. He must write his own sermons; and the time that remains will not be too much for his parish duties, and the care and improvement of his dwelling, which he cannot be excused from making as comfortable as possible. And I do not think it of light importance that he should have attentive and conciliatory manners towards everybody, especially towards those to whom he owes his preferment. I cannot acquit him of that duty; nor could I think well of the man who should omit an occasion of testifying his respect towards anybody connected with the family.” And with a bow to Fitzwilliam, he concluded his speech, which had been spoken so loud as to be heard by half the room. Many stared—many smiled; but no one looked more amused than Father himself, while his wife seriously commended William Collins for having spoken so sensibly, and observed in a half-whisper to Lady Lucas, that he was a remarkably clever, good kind of young man.
 
 To Elizabeth it appeared that, had her family made an agreement to expose themselves as much as they could during the evening, it would have been impossible for them to play their parts with more spirit or finer success; and happy did she think it for Charles and her sister that some of the exhibition had escaped his notice, and that his feelings were not of a sort to be much distressed by the folly which he must have witnessed. That his two sisters and Fitzwilliam, however, should have such an opportunity of ridiculing her relations, was bad enough, and she could not determine whether the silent contempt of the gentleman, or the insolent smiles of the ladies, were more intolerable.
 
 The rest of the evening brought her little amusement. She was teased by William Collins, who continued most perseveringly by her side, and though he could not prevail on her to dance with him again, put it out of her power to dance with others. In vain did she entreat him to stand up with somebody else, and offer to introduce him to any young lady in the room. He assured her, that as to dancing, he was perfectly indifferent to it; that his chief object was by delicate attentions to recommend himself to her and that he should therefore make a point of remaining close to her the whole evening. There was no arguing upon such a project. She owed her greatest relief to her friend Miss Lucas, who often joined them, and good-naturedly engaged William Collins’s conversation to herself.
 
 She was at least free from the offense of Fitzwilliam’s further notice; though often standing within a very short distance of her, quite disengaged, he never came near enough to speak. She felt it to be the probable consequence of her allusions to Charlie, and rejoiced in it.
 
 The Longbourn party were the last of all the company to depart, and, by a manoeuvre of Mother, had to wait for their carriage a quarter of an hour after everybody else was gone, which gave them time to see how heartily they were wished away by some of the family. Mrs. Hurst and her sister scarcely opened their mouths, except to complain of fatigue, and were evidently impatient to have the house to themselves. They repulsed every attempt of Mother at conversation, and by so doing threw a languor over the whole party, which was very little relieved by the long speeches of William Collins, who was complimenting Charles and his sisters on the elegance of their entertainment, and the hospitality and politeness which had marked their behaviour to their guests. Fitzwilliam said nothing at all. Father, in equal silence, was enjoying the scene. Charles and Jane were standing together, a little detached from the rest, and talked only to each other. Elizabeth preserved as steady a silence as either Mrs. Hurst or Caroline; and even Lydia was too much fatigued to utter more than the occasional exclamation of “Lord, how tired I am!” accompanied by a violent yawn.
 
 When at length they arose to take leave, Mother was most pressingly civil in her hope of seeing the whole family soon at Longbourn, and addressed herself especially to Charles, to assure him how happy he would make them by eating a family dinner with them at any time, without the ceremony of a formal invitation. Charles was all grateful pleasure, and he readily engaged for taking the earliest opportunity of waiting on her, after his return from London, whither he was obliged to go the next day for a short time.
 
 Mother was perfectly satisfied, and quitted the house under the delightful persuasion that, allowing for the necessary preparations of settlements, new carriages, and wedding clothes, she should undoubtedly see her daughter settled at Netherfield in the course of three or four months. Of having another daughter married to William Collins, she thought with equal certainty, and with considerable, though not equal, pleasure. Elizabeth was the least dear to her of all her children; and though the man and the match were quite good enough for her, the worth of each was eclipsed by Charles and Netherfield.
 Chapter 
 
  The next day opened a new scene at Longbourn . William Collins made William Collins declaration in form . Having resolved to do made without loss of time , as William Collins leave of absence extended only to the following Saturday , and having no feelings of diffidence to make it distressing to William Collins even at the moment , William Collins set about made in a very orderly manner , with all the observances , which William Collins supposed a regular part of the business . On finding Mother , Elizabeth , and one of the younger girls together , soon after breakfast , William Collins addressed the mother in these words : 
 
  “ May William Collins hope , Mother , for Mother interest with Mother fair daughter Elizabeth , when William Collins solicit for the honour of a private audience with Elizabeth in the course of this morning ? ” 
 
  Before Elizabeth had time for anything but a blush of surprise , Mother answered instantly , “ Oh dear!—yes — certainly . Mother am sure Elizabeth will be very happy — Mother am sure Elizabeth can have no objection . Come , one of the younger girls , Mother want one of the younger girls up stairs . ” And , gathering Mother work together , Mother was hastening away , when Elizabeth called out : 
 
  “ Mother , do not go . Elizabeth beg Mother will not go . William Collins must excuse Elizabeth . William Collins can have nothing to say to Elizabeth that anybody need not hear . Elizabeth am going away Elizabeth . ” 
 
  “ No , no , nonsense , Elizabeth . Mother desire Elizabeth to stay where Elizabeth are . ” And upon Elizabeth ’s seeming really , with vexed and embarrassed looks , about to escape , Mother added : “ Elizabeth , Mother insist upon Elizabeth staying and hearing William Collins . ” 
 
  Elizabeth would not oppose such an injunction — and a moment ’s consideration making Elizabeth also sensible that it would be wisest to get it over as soon and as quietly as possible , Elizabeth sat down again and tried to conceal , by incessant employment the feelings which were divided between distress and diversion . Mother and one of the younger girls walked off , and as soon as Mother and one of the younger girls were gone , William Collins began . 
 
  “ Believe William Collins , William Collins dear Elizabeth , that Elizabeth modesty , so far from doing Elizabeth any disservice , rather adds to Elizabeth other perfections . Elizabeth would have been less amiable in William Collins eyes had there not been this little unwillingness ; but allow William Collins to assure Elizabeth , that William Collins have Elizabeth respected mother ’s permission for this address . Elizabeth can hardly doubt the purport of William Collins discourse , however Elizabeth natural delicacy may lead Elizabeth to dissemble ; William Collins attentions have been too marked to be mistaken . Almost as soon as William Collins entered the house , William Collins singled Elizabeth out as the companion of William Collins future life . But before William Collins am run away with by William Collins feelings on this subject , perhaps it would be advisable for William Collins to state William Collins reasons for marrying — and , moreover , for coming into Hertfordshire with the design of selecting a wife , as William Collins certainly did . ” 
 
  The idea of William Collins , with all William Collins solemn composure , being run away with by William Collins feelings , made Elizabeth so near laughing , that Elizabeth could not use the short pause William Collins allowed in any attempt to stop William Collins further , and William Collins continued : 
 
  “ William Collins reasons for marrying are , first , that William Collins think it a right thing for every clergyman in easy circumstances ( like William Collins ) to set the example of matrimony in every clergyman in easy circumstances ( like William Collins ) parish ; secondly , that William Collins am convinced that it will add very greatly to William Collins happiness ; and thirdly — which perhaps William Collins ought to have mentioned earlier , that it is the particular advice and recommendation of the very noble lady whom William Collins have the honour of calling patroness . Twice has the very noble lady whom William Collins have the honour of calling patroness condescended to give William Collins the very noble lady whom William Collins have the honour of calling patroness opinion ( unasked too ! ) on this subject ; and it was but the very Saturday night before William Collins left Hunsford — between our pools at quadrille , while Mrs. Jenkinson was arranging Cathleen ’s footstool , that the very noble lady whom William Collins have the honour of calling patroness said , ‘ William Collins , William Collins must marry . A clergyman like William Collins must marry . Choose properly , choose a gentlewoman for the very noble lady whom William Collins have the honour of calling patroness sake ; and for William Collins own , let a gentlewoman be an active , useful sort of person , not brought up high , but able to make a small income go a good way . This is the very noble lady whom William Collins have the honour of calling patroness advice . Find such a woman as soon as William Collins can , bring such a woman to Hunsford , and the very noble lady whom William Collins have the honour of calling patroness will visit such a woman . ’ Allow William Collins , by the way , to observe , Elizabeth , that William Collins do not reckon the notice and kindness of Cathleen ’s as among the least of the advantages in William Collins power to offer . Elizabeth will find Cathleen ’s manners beyond anything William Collins can describe ; and Elizabeth wit and vivacity , William Collins think , must be acceptable to Cathleen ’s , especially when tempered with the silence and respect which Cathleen ’s rank will inevitably excite . Thus much for William Collins general intention in favour of matrimony ; it remains to be told why William Collins views were directed towards Longbourn instead of William Collins own neighbourhood , where William Collins can assure Elizabeth there are many amiable young women . But the fact is , that being , as William Collins am , to inherit this estate after the death of Elizabeth honoured father ( who , however , may live many years longer ) , William Collins could not satisfy William Collins without resolving to choose a wife from among Elizabeth honoured father ( who , however , may live many years longer ) daughters , that the loss to Elizabeth honoured father ( who , however , may live many years longer ) daughters might be as little as possible , when the melancholy event takes place — which , however , as William Collins have already said , may not be for several years . This has been William Collins motive , William Collins fair cousin , and William Collins flatter William Collins This will not sink William Collins in Elizabeth esteem . And now nothing remains for William Collins but to assure Elizabeth in the most animated language of the violence of William Collins affection . To fortune William Collins am perfectly indifferent , and shall make no demand of that nature on Elizabeth honoured father ( who , however , may live many years longer ) , since William Collins am well aware that it could not be complied with ; and that one thousand pounds in the four per cents , which will not be Elizabeth till after Elizabeth mother ’s decease , is all that Elizabeth may ever be entitled to . On that head , therefore , William Collins shall be uniformly silent ; and Elizabeth may assure Elizabeth that no ungenerous reproach shall ever pass William Collins lips when we are married . ” 
 
  It was absolutely necessary to interrupt William Collins now . 
 
  “ William Collins are too hasty , William Collins , ” Elizabeth cried . “ William Collins forget that Elizabeth have made no answer . Let Elizabeth do it without further loss of time . Accept Elizabeth thanks for the compliment William Collins are paying Elizabeth . Elizabeth am very sensible of the honour of William Collins proposals , but it is impossible for Elizabeth to do otherwise than to decline William Collins proposals . ” 
 
  “ William Collins am not now to learn , ” replied William Collins , with a formal wave of the hand , “ that it is usual with young ladies to reject the addresses of the man whom young ladies secretly mean to accept , when the man whom young ladies secretly mean to accept first applies for young ladies favour ; and that sometimes reject is repeated a second , or even a third time . William Collins am therefore by no means discouraged by what Elizabeth have just said , and shall hope to lead Elizabeth to the altar ere long . ” 
 
  “ Upon Elizabeth word , William Collins , ” cried Elizabeth , “ William Collins hope is a rather extraordinary one after Elizabeth declaration . Elizabeth do assure William Collins that Elizabeth am not one of those young ladies ( if such young ladies there are ) who are so daring as to risk those young ladies ( if such young ladies there are ) who are so daring as to risk happiness on the chance of being asked a second time . Elizabeth am perfectly serious in Elizabeth refusal . William Collins could not make Elizabeth happy , and Elizabeth am convinced that Elizabeth am the last woman in the world who could make William Collins so . Nay , were William Collins friend Cathleen to know Elizabeth , Elizabeth am persuaded Cathleen ’s would find Elizabeth in every respect ill qualified for the situation . ” 
 
  “ Were it certain that Cathleen ’s would think so , ” said William Collins very gravely—“but William Collins can not imagine that Cathleen ’s would at all disapprove of Elizabeth . And Elizabeth may be certain when William Collins have the honour of seeing Cathleen ’s again , William Collins shall speak in the very highest terms of Elizabeth modesty , economy , and other amiable qualification . ” 
 
  “ Indeed , William Collins , all praise of Elizabeth will be unnecessary . William Collins must give Elizabeth leave to judge for Elizabeth , and pay Elizabeth the compliment of believing what Elizabeth say . Elizabeth wish William Collins very happy and very rich , and by refusing William Collins hand , do all in Elizabeth power to prevent William Collins being otherwise . In making Elizabeth the offer , William Collins must have satisfied the delicacy of William Collins feelings with regard to Elizabeth family , and may take possession of this estate whenever this estate falls , without any self - reproach . This matter may be considered , therefore , as finally settled . ” And rising as Elizabeth thus spoke , Elizabeth would have quitted the room , had William Collins not thus addressed Elizabeth : 
 
  “ When William Collins do William Collins the honour of speaking to Elizabeth next on the subject , William Collins shall hope to receive a more favourable answer than Elizabeth have now given William Collins ; though William Collins am far from accusing Elizabeth of cruelty at present , because William Collins know it to be the established custom of Elizabeth sex to reject a man on the first application , and perhaps Elizabeth have even now said as much to encourage William Collins suit as would be consistent with the true delicacy of the female character . ” 
 
  “ Really , William Collins , ” cried Elizabeth with some warmth , “ William Collins puzzle Elizabeth exceedingly . If what Elizabeth have hitherto said can appear to William Collins in the form of encouragement , Elizabeth know not how to express Elizabeth refusal in such a way as to convince William Collins of Elizabeth refusal being one . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth must give William Collins leave to flatter William Collins , William Collins dear cousin , that Elizabeth refusal of William Collins addresses is merely words of course . William Collins reasons for believing it are briefly these : It does not appear to William Collins that William Collins hand is unworthy of Elizabeth acceptance , or that the establishment William Collins can offer would be any other than highly desirable . Elizabeth situation in life , Elizabeth connections with the family of de Bourgh , and Elizabeth relationship to William Collins own , are circumstances highly in Elizabeth favour ; and William Collins should take it into further consideration , that in spite of William Collins manifold attractions , it is by no means certain that another offer of marriage may ever be made William Collins . William Collins portion is unhappily so small that William Collins portion will in all likelihood undo the effects of William Collins loveliness and amiable qualifications . As Elizabeth must therefore conclude that William Collins are not serious in William Collins rejection of Elizabeth , Elizabeth shall choose to attribute William Collins rejection of Elizabeth to William Collins wish of increasing Elizabeth love by suspense , according to the usual practice of elegant females . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth do assure William Collins , William Collins , that Elizabeth have no pretensions whatever to that kind of elegance which consists in tormenting a respectable man . Elizabeth would rather be paid the compliment of being believed sincere . Elizabeth thank William Collins again and again for the honour William Collins have done Elizabeth in William Collins proposals , but to accept William Collins proposals is absolutely impossible . Elizabeth feelings in every respect forbid accept . Can Elizabeth speak plainer ? Do not consider Elizabeth now as an elegant female , intending to plague William Collins , but as a rational creature , speaking the truth from a rational creature , speaking the truth from heart . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth are uniformly charming ! ” cried William Collins , with an air of awkward gallantry ; “ and William Collins am persuaded that when sanctioned by the express authority of both Elizabeth excellent parents , William Collins proposals will not fail of being acceptable . ” 
 
  To such perseverance in wilful self - deception Elizabeth would make no reply , and immediately and in silence withdrew ; determined , if William Collins persisted in considering Elizabeth repeated refusals as flattering encouragement , to apply to Elizabeth father , whose negative might be uttered in such a manner as to be decisive , and whose behaviour at least could not be mistaken for the affectation and coquetry of an elegant female . 
 Chapter 
 
  William Collins was not left long to the silent contemplation of William Collins successful love ; for Mother , having dawdled about in the vestibule to watch for the end of the conference , no sooner saw Elizabeth open the door and with quick step pass Elizabeth towards the staircase , than Mother entered the breakfast - room , and congratulated both William Collins and Mother in warm terms on the happy prospect of both William Collins and Mother nearer connection . William Collins received and returned congratulated with equal pleasure , and then proceeded to relate the particulars of their interview , with the result of which William Collins trusted William Collins had every reason to be satisfied , since the refusal which William Collins cousin had steadfastly given William Collins would naturally flow from Elizabeth bashful modesty and the genuine delicacy of Elizabeth character . 
 
  This information , however , startled Mother ; Mother would have been glad to be equally satisfied that Elizabeth had meant to encourage William Collins by protesting against William Collins proposals , but Mother dared not believe meant , and could not help saying so . 
 
  “ But , depend upon it , William Collins , ” Mother added , “ that Elizabeth shall be brought to reason . Mother will speak to Elizabeth about it directly . Elizabeth is a very headstrong , foolish girl , and does not know Elizabeth own interest but Mother will make Elizabeth know Elizabeth own interest . ” 
 
  “ Pardon William Collins for interrupting Mother , Mother , ” cried William Collins ; “ but if Elizabeth is really headstrong and foolish , William Collins know not whether Elizabeth would altogether be a very desirable wife to a man in William Collins situation , who naturally looks for happiness in the marriage state . If therefore Elizabeth actually persists in rejecting William Collins suit , perhaps it were better not to force Elizabeth into accepting William Collins , because if liable to such defects of temper , Elizabeth could not contribute much to William Collins felicity . ” 
 
  “ William Collins , William Collins quite misunderstand Mother , ” said Mother , alarmed . “ Elizabeth is only headstrong in such matters as these . In everything else Elizabeth is as good - natured a girl as ever lived . Mother will go directly to Father , and we shall very soon settle it with Elizabeth , Mother am sure . ” 
 
  Mother would not give William Collins time to reply , but hurrying instantly to Father , called out as Mother entered the library , “ Oh ! Father , Father are wanted immediately ; we are all in an uproar . Father must come and make Elizabeth marry William Collins , for Elizabeth vows Elizabeth will not have William Collins , and if Father do not make haste William Collins will change William Collins mind and not have Elizabeth . ” 
 
  Father raised Father eyes from Father book as Elizabeth entered , and fixed Father eyes on Elizabeth face with a calm unconcern which was not in the least altered by Elizabeth communication . 
 
  “ Father have not the pleasure of understanding Elizabeth , ” said Father , when Elizabeth had finished Elizabeth communication . “ Of what are Elizabeth talking ? ” 
 
  “ Of William Collins and Elizabeth . Elizabeth declares Elizabeth will not have William Collins , and William Collins begins to say that William Collins will not have Elizabeth . ” 
 
  “ And what am Father to do on the occasion ? It seems an hopeless business . ” 
 
  “ Speak to Elizabeth about it Father . Tell Elizabeth that Father insist upon Elizabeth marrying William Collins . ” 
 
  “ Let Elizabeth be called down . Elizabeth shall hear Father opinion . ” 
 
  Mother rang the bell , and Elizabeth was summoned to the library . 
 
  “ Come here , Elizabeth , ” cried Elizabeth father as Elizabeth appeared . “ Father have sent for Elizabeth on an affair of importance . Father understand that William Collins has made Elizabeth an offer of marriage . Is an offer of marriage true ? ” Elizabeth replied that an offer of marriage was . “ Very well — and an offer of marriage Elizabeth have refused ? ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth have , Father . ” 
 
  “ Very well . We now come to the point . Elizabeth mother insists upon Elizabeth accepting an offer of marriage . Is it not so , Mother ? ” 
 
  “ Yes , or Elizabeth will never see Mother again . ” 
 
  “ An unhappy alternative is before Elizabeth , Elizabeth . From this day Elizabeth must be a stranger to one of Elizabeth parents . Elizabeth mother will never see Elizabeth again if Elizabeth do not marry William Collins , and Father will never see Elizabeth again if Elizabeth do . ” 
 
  Elizabeth could not but smile at such a conclusion of such a beginning , but Mother , who had persuaded Mother that Mother husband regarded the affair as Mother wished , was excessively disappointed . 
 
  “ What do Father mean , Father , in talking this way ? Father promised Mother to insist upon Elizabeth marrying William Collins . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth , ” replied Mother husband , “ Father have two small favours to request . First , that Elizabeth will allow Father the free use of Father understanding on the present occasion ; and secondly , of Father room . Father shall be glad to have the library to Father as soon as may be . ” 
 
  Not yet , however , in spite of Mother disappointment in William Collins , did Mother give up the point . Mother talked to Elizabeth again and again ; coaxed and threatened Elizabeth by turns . Mother endeavoured to secure Jane in Mother interest ; but Jane , with all possible mildness , declined interfering ; and Elizabeth , sometimes with real earnestness , and sometimes with playful gaiety , replied to Mother attacks . Though Elizabeth manner varied , however , Elizabeth determination never did . 
 
  William Collins , meanwhile , was meditating in solitude on what had passed . William Collins thought too well of William Collins to comprehend on what motives William Collins cousin could refuse William Collins ; and though William Collins pride was hurt , William Collins suffered in no other way . William Collins regard for Elizabeth was quite imaginary ; and the possibility of Elizabeth deserving Elizabeth mother ’s reproach prevented William Collins feeling any regret . 
 
  While the family were in this confusion , Charlotte Lucas came to spend the day with the family . Charlotte Lucas was met in the vestibule by Lydia , who , flying to Charlotte Lucas , cried in a half whisper , “ Lydia am glad Charlotte Lucas are come , for there is such fun here ! What do Charlotte Lucas think has happened this morning ? William Collins has made an offer to Elizabeth , and Elizabeth will not have William Collins . ” 
 
  Charlotte Lucas hardly had time to answer , before they were joined by Kitty , who came to tell the same news ; and no sooner had they entered the breakfast - room , where Mother was alone , than Mother likewise began on the subject , calling on Charlotte Lucas for Charlotte Lucas compassion , and entreating Charlotte Lucas to persuade Charlotte Lucas friend Elizabeth to comply with the wishes of all Elizabeth family . “ Pray do , Mother dear Miss Lucas , ” Mother added in a melancholy tone , “ for nobody is on Mother side , nobody takes part with Mother . Mother am cruelly used , nobody feels for Mother poor nerves . ” 
 
  Charlotte Lucas reply was spared by the entrance of Jane and Elizabeth . 
 
  “ Aye , there Elizabeth comes , ” continued Mother , “ looking as unconcerned as may be , and caring no more for the family than if the family were at York , provided Elizabeth can have Elizabeth own way . But Mother tell Elizabeth , Elizabeth — if Elizabeth take it into Elizabeth head to go on refusing every offer of marriage in this way , Elizabeth will never get a husband at all — and Mother am sure Mother do not know who is to maintain Elizabeth when Elizabeth father is dead . Mother shall not be able to keep Elizabeth — and so Mother warn Elizabeth . Mother have done with Elizabeth from this very day . Mother told Elizabeth in the library , Elizabeth know , that Mother should never speak to Elizabeth again , and Elizabeth will find Mother as good as Mother word . Mother have no pleasure in talking to undutiful children . Not that Mother have much pleasure , indeed , in talking to anybody . People who suffer as Mother do from nervous complaints can have no great inclination for talking . Nobody can tell what Mother suffer ! But it is always so . Those who do not complain are never pitied . ” 
 
  Elizabeth listened in silence to this effusion , sensible that any attempt to reason with Mother or soothe Mother would only increase the irritation . Mother talked on , therefore , without interruption from any of Elizabeth , till Elizabeth were joined by William Collins , who entered the room with an air more stately than usual , and on perceiving whom , Mother said to Elizabeth , “ Now , Mother do insist upon it , that Elizabeth , hold Elizabeth tongues , and let Mother and William Collins have a little conversation together . ” 
 
  Elizabeth passed quietly out of the room , Jane and Kitty followed , but Lydia stood Lydia ground , determined to hear all Lydia could ; and Charlotte Lucas , detained first by the civility of William Collins Collins , whose enquiries after Charlotte Lucas and all Charlotte Lucas family were very minute , and then by a little curiosity , satisfied Charlotte Lucas with walking to the window and pretending not to hear . In a doleful voice Mother began a little conversation : “ Oh ! William Collins ! ” 
 
  “ Father dear madam , ” replied William Collins , “ let us be for ever silent on this point . Far be it from William Collins , ” William Collins presently continued , in a voice that marked William Collins displeasure , “ to resent the behaviour of Mother daughter . Resignation to inevitable evils is the duty of us all ; the peculiar duty of a young man who has been so fortunate as William Collins have been in early preferment ; and William Collins trust William Collins am resigned . Perhaps not the less so from feeling a doubt of William Collins positive happiness had Elizabeth honoured William Collins with Elizabeth hand ; for William Collins have often observed that resignation is never so perfect as when the blessing denied begins to lose somewhat of the blessing denied value in our estimation . Elizabeth will not , William Collins hope , consider William Collins as showing any disrespect to the family , William Collins dear madam , by thus withdrawing William Collins pretensions to Elizabeth favour , without having paid Mother and Father the compliment of requesting Mother and Father to interpose Mother and Father authority in William Collins behalf . William Collins conduct may , William Collins fear , be objectionable in having accepted William Collins dismission from Elizabeth lips instead of Mother own . But we are all liable to error . William Collins have certainly meant well through the whole affair . William Collins object has been to secure an amiable companion for William Collins , with due consideration for the advantage of all Mother family , and if William Collins manner has been at all reprehensible , William Collins here beg leave to apologise . ” 
 Chapter 
 
  The discussion of William Collins ’s offer was now nearly at an end , and Elizabeth had only to suffer from the uncomfortable feelings necessarily attending The discussion of William Collins ’s offer , and occasionally from some peevish allusions of Elizabeth mother . As for William Collins ’s William Collins ’s , William Collins ’s feelings were chiefly expressed , not by embarrassment or dejection , or by trying to avoid Elizabeth , but by stiffness of manner and resentful silence . William Collins ’s scarcely ever spoke to Elizabeth , and the assiduous attentions which William Collins ’s had been so sensible of William Collins ’s were transferred for the rest of the day to Miss Lucas , whose civility in listening to William Collins ’s was a seasonable relief to The whole party , and especially to Miss Lucas , whose civility in listening to William Collins ’s was a seasonable relief to The whole party , and especially to friend . 
 
  The morrow produced no abatement of Elizabeth mother ill - humour or ill health . William Collins ’s was also in the same state of angry pride . Elizabeth had hoped that William Collins ’s resentment might shorten William Collins ’s visit , but William Collins ’s plan did not appear in the least affected by William Collins ’s resentment . William Collins ’s was always to have gone on Saturday , and to Saturday William Collins ’s meant to stay . 
 
  After breakfast , the girls walked to Meryton to enquire if Charlie were returned , and to lament over William Collins ’s absence from the Netherfield ball . William Collins ’s joined the girls on the girls entering Meryton , and attended the girls to the girls aunt ’s where William Collins ’s regret and vexation , and the concern of everybody , was well talked over . To Elizabeth , however , William Collins ’s voluntarily acknowledged that the necessity of William Collins ’s absence had been self - imposed . 
 
  “ William Collins ’s found , ” said William Collins ’s , “ as the time drew near that William Collins ’s had better not meet Fitzwilliam ; that to be in the same room , the same party with Fitzwilliam for so many hours together , might be more than William Collins ’s could bear , and that scenes might arise unpleasant to more than William Collins ’s . ” 
 
  Elizabeth highly approved William Collins ’s forbearance , and they had leisure for a full discussion of William Collins ’s forbearance , and for all the commendation which they civilly bestowed on each other , as George and another officer walked back with they to Longbourn , and during the walk George particularly attended to Elizabeth . George accompanying them was a double advantage ; Elizabeth felt all the compliment George accompanying them offered to Elizabeth , and George accompanying them was most acceptable as an occasion of introducing George to Elizabeth father and mother . 
 
  Soon after them return , a letter was delivered to Miss Bennet ; a letter came from Netherfield . The envelope contained a sheet of elegant , little , hot - pressed paper , well covered with a lady ’s fair , flowing hand ; and Elizabeth saw Miss Bennet countenance change as Miss Bennet read a letter , and saw Miss Bennet dwelling intently on some particular passages . Miss Bennet recollected Miss Bennet soon , and putting a letter away , tried to join with Miss Bennet usual cheerfulness in the general conversation ; but Elizabeth felt an anxiety on the subject which drew off Elizabeth attention even from George ; and no sooner had George and George companion taken leave , than a glance from Miss Bennet invited Elizabeth to follow Miss Bennet up stairs . When them had gained them own room , Miss Bennet , taking out a letter , said : 
 
  “ a letter is from a lady ’s ; what a letter contains has surprised Miss Bennet a good deal . The whole party have left Netherfield by this time , and are on The whole party way to town — and without any intention of coming back again . Elizabeth shall hear what a lady ’s says . ” 
 
  Miss Bennet then read the first sentence aloud , which comprised the information of The whole party having just resolved to follow The whole party brother to town directly , and of The whole party meaning to dine in Grosvenor Street , where Mr. Hurst had a house . The next was in these words : “ Miss Bennet do not pretend to regret anything Miss Bennet shall leave in Hertfordshire , except Elizabeth society , Miss Bennet dearest friend ; but we will hope , at some future period , to enjoy many returns of that delightful intercourse we have known , and in the meanwhile may lessen the pain of separation by a very frequent and most unreserved correspondence . Miss Bennet depend on Elizabeth for that . ” To these highflown expressions Elizabeth listened with all the insensibility of distrust ; and though the suddenness of The whole party removal surprised Elizabeth , Elizabeth saw nothing in it really to lament ; it was not to be supposed that The whole party absence from Netherfield would prevent Charlie being there ; and as to the loss of Elizabeth society , Elizabeth was persuaded that Miss Bennet must cease to regard Elizabeth society , in the enjoyment of Miss Bennet . 
 
  “ It is unlucky , ” said Miss Bennet , after a short pause , “ that Elizabeth should not be able to see Elizabeth friends before Elizabeth friends leave the country . But may we not hope that the period of future happiness to which a lady ’s looks forward may arrive earlier than a lady ’s is aware , and that the delightful intercourse Elizabeth have known as friends will be renewed with yet greater satisfaction as sisters ? Charlie will not be detained in London by them . ” 
 
  “ a lady ’s decidedly says that none of The whole party will return into Hertfordshire this winter . Miss Bennet will read it to Elizabeth : ” 
 
  “ When Miss Bennet brother left us yesterday , The whole party brother imagined that the business which took The whole party brother to London might be concluded in three or four days ; but as us are certain the business which took The whole party brother to London can not be so , and at the same time convinced that when Charlie gets to town Charlie will be in no hurry to leave it again , us have determined on following Charlie thither , that Charlie may not be obliged to spend Charlie vacant hours in a comfortless hotel . Many of Miss Bennet acquaintances are already there for the winter ; Miss Bennet wish that Miss Bennet could hear that Elizabeth , Miss Bennet dearest friend , had any intention of making one of Many of Miss Bennet acquaintances — but of making Miss Bennet despair . Miss Bennet sincerely hope Elizabeth Christmas in Hertfordshire may abound in the gaieties which that season generally brings , and that Elizabeth beaux will be so numerous as to prevent Elizabeth feeling the loss of the three of whom we shall deprive Elizabeth . ” 
 
  “ It is evident by this , ” added Miss Bennet , “ that The whole party brother comes back no more this winter . ” 
 
  “ It is only evident that a lady ’s does not mean that The whole party brother should . ” 
 
  “ Why will Miss Bennet think so ? It must be a lady ’s own doing . a lady ’s is a lady ’s own master . But Elizabeth do not know all . Miss Bennet will read Elizabeth the passage which particularly hurts Miss Bennet . Miss Bennet will have no reserves from Elizabeth . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam is impatient to see Fitzwilliam sister ; and , to confess the truth , we are scarcely less eager to meet Fitzwilliam sister again . Miss Bennet really do not think Fitzwilliam sister has Fitzwilliam sister equal for beauty , elegance , and accomplishments ; and the affection Fitzwilliam sister inspires in Louisa and Miss Bennet is heightened into something still more interesting , from the hope Louisa and Miss Bennet dare entertain of Fitzwilliam sister being hereafter Louisa and Miss Bennet sister . Miss Bennet do not know whether Miss Bennet ever before mentioned to Elizabeth Miss Bennet feelings on this subject ; but Miss Bennet will not leave the country without confiding Miss Bennet feelings on this subject , and Miss Bennet trust Elizabeth will not esteem Miss Bennet feelings on this subject unreasonable . The whole party brother admires Fitzwilliam sister greatly already ; The whole party brother will have frequent opportunity now of seeing Fitzwilliam sister on the most intimate footing ; Fitzwilliam sister relations all wish the connection as much as The whole party brother own ; and a sister ’s partiality is not misleading Miss Bennet , Miss Bennet think , when Miss Bennet call Charlie most capable of engaging any woman ’s heart . With all these circumstances to favour an attachment , and nothing to prevent an attachment , am Miss Bennet wrong , Elizabeth , in indulging the hope of an event which will secure the happiness of so many ? ” 
 
  “ What do Elizabeth think of the passage which particularly hurts Miss Bennet , Miss Bennet dear Elizabeth ? ” said Miss Bennet as Miss Bennet finished the passage which particularly hurts Miss Bennet . “ Is the passage which particularly hurts Miss Bennet not clear enough ? Does the passage which particularly hurts Miss Bennet not expressly declare that a lady ’s neither expects nor wishes Miss Bennet to be a lady ’s sister ; that a lady ’s is perfectly convinced of a lady ’s brother ’s indifference ; and that if a lady ’s suspects the nature of Miss Bennet feelings for The whole party brother , a lady ’s means ( most kindly ! ) to put Miss Bennet on Miss Bennet guard ? Can there be any other opinion on this subject ? ” 
 
  “ Yes , there can ; for Miss Bennet is totally different . Will Elizabeth hear it ? ” 
 
  Elizabeth Most willingly . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth shall have it in a few words . a lady ’s sees that a lady ’s brother is in love with Elizabeth , and wants The whole party brother to marry Fitzwilliam sister . a lady ’s follows The whole party brother to town in hope of keeping The whole party brother there , and tries to persuade Elizabeth that The whole party brother does not care about Elizabeth . ” 
 
  Miss Bennet shook Miss Bennet head . 
 
  “ Indeed , Elizabeth , Elizabeth ought to believe Miss Bennet . No one who has ever seen Elizabeth together can doubt The whole party brother affection . a lady ’s , Miss Bennet am sure , can not . a lady ’s is not such a simpleton . Could a lady ’s have seen half as much love in Fitzwilliam for a lady ’s , a lady ’s would have ordered a lady ’s wedding clothes . But the case is this : We are not rich enough or grand enough for them ; and a lady ’s is the more anxious to get Fitzwilliam sister for a lady ’s brother , from the notion that when there has been one intermarriage , a lady ’s may have less trouble in achieving a second ; in which there is certainly some ingenuity , and Miss Bennet dare say it would succeed , if Cathleen were out of the way . But , Elizabeth , Elizabeth can not seriously imagine that because a lady ’s tells Elizabeth The whole party brother greatly admires Fitzwilliam sister , The whole party brother is in the smallest degree less sensible of Elizabeth merit than when The whole party brother took leave of Elizabeth on Tuesday , or that it will be in a lady ’s power to persuade The whole party brother that , instead of being in love with Elizabeth , The whole party brother is very much in love with a lady ’s friend . ” 
 
  “ If we thought alike of a lady ’s , ” replied Miss Bennet , “ Elizabeth representation of all this might make Miss Bennet quite easy . But Miss Bennet know the foundation is unjust . a lady ’s is incapable of wilfully deceiving anyone ; and all that Miss Bennet can hope in this case is that a lady ’s is deceiving a lady ’s . ” 
 
  “ That is right . Elizabeth could not have started a more happy idea , since Elizabeth will not take comfort in Miss Bennet . Believe a lady ’s to be deceived , by all means . Elizabeth have now done Elizabeth duty by a lady ’s , and must fret no longer . ” 
 
  “ But , Elizabeth dear sister , can Miss Bennet be happy , even supposing the best , in accepting a man whose sisters and friends are all wishing him to marry elsewhere ? ” 
 
  “ Miss Bennet must decide for Miss Bennet , ” said Elizabeth ; “ and if , upon mature deliberation , Miss Bennet find that the misery of disobliging The whole party brother two sisters is more than equivalent to the happiness of being The whole party brother wife , Elizabeth advise Miss Bennet by all means to refuse The whole party brother . ” 
 
  “ How can Elizabeth talk so ? ” said Miss Bennet , faintly smiling . “ Elizabeth must know that though Miss Bennet should be exceedingly grieved at The whole party brother two sisters disapprobation , Miss Bennet could not hesitate . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth did not think Miss Bennet would ; and that being the case , Elizabeth can not consider Miss Bennet situation with much compassion . ” 
 
  “ But if The whole party brother returns no more this winter , Miss Bennet choice will never be required . A thousand things may arise in six months ! ” 
 
  The idea of The whole party brother returning no more Elizabeth treated with the utmost contempt . The idea of The whole party brother returning no more appeared to Elizabeth merely the suggestion of a lady ’s interested wishes , and Elizabeth could not for a moment suppose that those wishes , however openly or artfully spoken , could influence a young man so totally independent of everyone . 
 
  Elizabeth represented to Miss Bennet as forcibly as possible what Elizabeth felt on this subject , and had soon the pleasure of seeing its happy effect . Miss Bennet temper was not desponding , and Miss Bennet was gradually led to hope , though the diffidence of affection sometimes overcame the hope , that Charlie would return to Netherfield and answer every wish of Miss Bennet heart . 
 
  They agreed that Elizabeth mother should only hear of the departure of the family , without being alarmed on the score of The whole party brother conduct ; but even this partial communication gave Elizabeth mother a great deal of concern , and Elizabeth mother bewailed it as exceedingly unlucky that the girls should happen to go away just as the girls were all getting so intimate together . After lamenting it , however , at some length , Elizabeth mother had the consolation that Charlie would be soon down again and soon dining at Longbourn , and the conclusion of all was the comfortable declaration , that though George had been invited only to a family dinner , Elizabeth mother would take care to have two full courses . 
 Chapter 
 
  The Bennets were engaged to dine with the Lucases and again during the chief of the day was Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins . Elizabeth took an opportunity of thanking Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins . “ It keeps William Collins in good humour , ” said Elizabeth , “ and Elizabeth am more obliged to Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins than Elizabeth can express . ” Charlotte assured Elizabeth of Charlotte satisfaction in being useful , and that being amply repaid Charlotte for the little sacrifice of Charlotte time . This was very amiable , but Charlotte ’s kindness extended farther than Elizabeth had any conception of ; This object was nothing else than to secure Elizabeth from any return of William Collins ’s addresses , by engaging William Collins ’s addresses towards Charlotte . Such was Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins scheme ; and appearances were so favourable , that when both William Collins and Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins parted at night , Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins would have felt almost secure of success if William Collins had not been to leave Hertfordshire so very soon . But here Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins did injustice to the fire and independence of William Collins character , for the fire and independence of William Collins character led William Collins to escape out of Longbourn House the next morning with admirable slyness , and hasten to Lucas Lodge to throw William Collins at Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins feet . William Collins was anxious to avoid the notice of William Collins cousins , from a conviction that if William Collins cousins saw William Collins depart , William Collins cousins could not fail to conjecture William Collins design , and William Collins was not willing to have the attempt known till the attempt success might be known likewise ; for though feeling almost secure , and with reason , for Charlotte had been tolerably encouraging , William Collins was comparatively diffident since the adventure of Wednesday . William Collins reception , however , was of the most flattering kind . Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins perceived William Collins from an upper window as William Collins walked towards Longbourn House , and instantly set out to meet William Collins accidentally in the lane . But little had Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins dared to hope that so much love and eloquence awaited Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins there . 
 
  In as short a time as William Collins ’s long speeches would allow , everything was settled between both William Collins and Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins to the satisfaction of both William Collins and Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins ; and as both William Collins and Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins entered Longbourn House William Collins earnestly entreated Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins to name the day that was to make William Collins the happiest of men ; and though such a solicitation must be waived for the present , Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins felt no inclination to trifle with William Collins happiness . The stupidity with which William Collins was favoured by nature must guard William Collins courtship from any charm that could make a woman wish for its continuance ; and Miss Lucas , who accepted William Collins solely from the pure and disinterested desire of an establishment , cared not how soon an establishment were gained . 
 
  William Collins and Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins were speedily applied to for William Collins and Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins consent ; and William Collins and Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins consent was bestowed with a most joyful alacrity . William Collins ’s present circumstances made William Collins a most eligible match for William Collins and Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins daughter , to whom William Collins and Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins could give little fortune ; and William Collins prospects of future wealth were exceedingly fair . Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins began directly to calculate , with more interest than the matter had ever excited before , how many years longer William Collins was likely to live ; and William Collins gave it as William Collins decided opinion , that whenever William Collins should be in possession of the Longbourn estate , it would be highly expedient that both William Collins and Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins should make both William Collins and Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins appearance at St. James ’s . The whole family , in short , were properly overjoyed on the occasion . The younger girls formed hopes of coming out a year or two sooner than The younger girls might otherwise have done ; and the boys were relieved from the boys apprehension of Charlotte ’s dying an old maid . Charlotte Charlotte was tolerably composed . Charlotte had gained Charlotte point , and had time to consider of Charlotte point . Charlotte reflections were in general satisfactory . William Collins , to be sure , was neither sensible nor agreeable ; William Collins society was irksome , and William Collins attachment to Charlotte must be imaginary . But still William Collins would be Charlotte husband . Without thinking highly either of men or matrimony , marriage had always been Charlotte object ; marriage was the only provision for well - educated young women of small fortune , and however uncertain of giving happiness , must be well - educated young women of small fortune pleasantest preservative from want . This preservative Charlotte had now obtained ; and at the age of twenty - seven , without having ever been handsome , Charlotte felt all the good luck of it . The least agreeable circumstance in the business was the surprise the business must occasion to Elizabeth , whose friendship Charlotte valued beyond that of any other person . Elizabeth would wonder , and probably would blame Charlotte ; and though Elizabeth resolution was not to be shaken , Elizabeth feelings must be hurt by such a disapprobation . Charlotte resolved to give Elizabeth the information Charlotte , and therefore charged William Collins , when William Collins returned to Longbourn to dinner , to drop no hint of what had passed before any of the family . A promise of secrecy was of course very dutifully given , but A promise of secrecy could not be kept without difficulty ; for the curiosity excited by William Collins long absence burst forth in such very direct questions on William Collins return as required some ingenuity to evade , and William Collins was at the same time exercising great self - denial , for William Collins was longing to publish William Collins prosperous love . 
 
  As William Collins was to begin William Collins journey too early on the morrow to see any of the family , the ceremony of leave - taking was performed when the ladies moved for the night ; and Mother , with great politeness and cordiality , said how happy the ladies should be to see William Collins at Longbourn again , whenever William Collins engagements might allow William Collins to visit the ladies . 
 
  “ William Collins dear madam , ” William Collins replied , “ this invitation is particularly gratifying , because this invitation is what William Collins have been hoping to receive ; and Mother may be very certain that William Collins shall avail William Collins of this invitation as soon as possible . ” 
 
  the ladies were all astonished ; and Father , who could by no means wish for so speedy a return , immediately said : 
 
  “ But is there not danger of Cathleen ’s disapprobation here , Father , who could by no means wish for so speedy a return , good sir ? William Collins had better neglect William Collins relations than run the risk of offending William Collins patroness . ” 
 
  “ Father , who could by no means wish for so speedy a return , , ” replied William Collins , “ William Collins am particularly obliged to Father , who could by no means wish for so speedy a return , for this friendly caution , and Father , who could by no means wish for so speedy a return , may depend upon William Collins not taking so material a step without Cathleen ’s concurrence . ” 
 
  “ William Collins can not be too much upon William Collins guard . Risk anything rather than Cathleen ’s displeasure ; and if William Collins find Cathleen ’s displeasure likely to be raised by William Collins coming to the family again , which Father , who could by no means wish for so speedy a return , should think exceedingly probable , stay quietly at home , and be satisfied that the family shall take no offence . ” 
 
  “ Believe William Collins , Father , who could by no means wish for so speedy a return , , William Collins gratitude is warmly excited by such affectionate attention ; and depend upon it , Father , who could by no means wish for so speedy a return , will speedily receive from William Collins a letter of thanks for this , and for every other mark of Father , who could by no means wish for so speedy a return , regard during William Collins stay in Hertfordshire . As for William Collins fair cousins , though William Collins absence may not be long enough to render William Collins absence necessary , William Collins shall now take the liberty of wishing William Collins fair cousins health and happiness , not excepting William Collins cousin Elizabeth . ” 
 
  With proper civilities the ladies then withdrew ; the ladies equally surprised that William Collins meditated a quick return . Mother wished to understand by it that William Collins thought of paying William Collins addresses to one of Mother younger girls , and Mary might have been prevailed on to accept William Collins . Mother rated William Collins abilities much higher than any of the others ; there was a solidity in William Collins reflections which often struck Mother , and though by no means so clever as Mother , Mother thought that if encouraged to read and improve William Collins by such an example as Mother , William Collins might become a very agreeable companion . But on the following morning , every hope of this kind was done away . Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins called soon after breakfast , and in a private conference with Elizabeth related the event of the day before . 
 
  The possibility of William Collins ’s fancying William Collins in love with Elizabeth had once occurred to Elizabeth within the last day or two ; but that Charlotte could encourage William Collins seemed almost as far from possibility as Elizabeth could encourage William Collins Elizabeth , and Elizabeth astonishment was consequently so great as to overcome at first the bounds of decorum , and Elizabeth could not help crying out : 
 
  “ Engaged to William Collins ! Elizabeth dear Charlotte — impossible ! ” 
 
  The steady countenance which Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins had commanded in telling Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins story , gave way to a momentary confusion here on receiving so direct a reproach ; though , as it was no more than Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins expected , Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins soon regained Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins composure , and calmly replied : 
 
  “ Why should Elizabeth be surprised , Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins dear Elizabeth ? Do Elizabeth think it incredible that William Collins should be able to procure any woman ’s good opinion , because William Collins was not so happy as to succeed with Elizabeth ? ” 
 
  But Elizabeth had now recollected Elizabeth , and making a strong effort for it , was able to assure with tolerable firmness that the prospect of both William Collins and Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins relationship was highly grateful to Elizabeth , and that Elizabeth wished Elizabeth all imaginable happiness . 
 
  “ Charlotte see what Elizabeth are feeling , ” replied Charlotte . “ Elizabeth must be surprised , very much surprised — so lately as William Collins was wishing to marry Elizabeth . But when Elizabeth have had time to think it over , Charlotte hope Elizabeth will be satisfied with what Charlotte have done . Charlotte am not romantic , Father , who could by no means wish for so speedy a return , know ; Charlotte never was . Charlotte ask only a comfortable home ; and considering William Collins ’s character , connection , and situation in life , Charlotte am convinced that Charlotte chance of happiness with William Collins is as fair as most people can boast on entering the marriage state . ” 
 
  Elizabeth quietly answered “ Undoubtedly ; ” and after an awkward pause , both William Collins and Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to William Collins returned to the rest of the family . Charlotte did not stay much longer , and Elizabeth was then left to reflect on what Elizabeth had heard . It was a long time before Elizabeth became at all reconciled to the idea of so unsuitable a match . The strangeness of William Collins ’s making two offers of marriage within three days was nothing in comparison of William Collins being now accepted . Elizabeth had always felt that Charlotte ’s opinion of matrimony was not exactly like Elizabeth own , but Elizabeth had not supposed it to be possible that , when called into action , Charlotte would have sacrificed every better feeling to worldly advantage . Charlotte the wife of William Collins was a most humiliating picture ! And to the pang of a friend disgracing a friend disgracing and sunk in a friend disgracing esteem , was added the distressing conviction that it was impossible for a friend disgracing to be tolerably happy in the lot a friend disgracing had chosen . 
 Chapter 
 
  Elizabeth was sitting with Elizabeth mother and sisters , reflecting on what Elizabeth had heard , and doubting whether Elizabeth was authorised to mention it , when Sir William Lucas Sir William Lucas appeared , sent by Sir William Lucas daughter , to announce Elizabeth engagement to the family . With many compliments to Elizabeth mother and sisters , and much self - gratulation on the prospect of a connection between the houses , Sir William Lucas unfolded the matter — to an audience not merely wondering , but incredulous ; for Mother , with more perseverance than politeness , protested Sir William Lucas must be entirely mistaken ; and Lydia , always unguarded and often uncivil , boisterously exclaimed : 
 
  “ Good Lord ! Sir William Lucas , how can Sir William Lucas tell such a story ? Do not Sir William Lucas know that William Collins wants to marry Elizabeth ? ” 
 
  Nothing less than the complaisance of a courtier could have borne without anger such treatment ; but Sir William Lucas good breeding carried Sir William Lucas through it all ; and though Sir William Lucas begged leave to be positive as to the truth of Sir William Lucas information , Sir William Lucas listened to all their impertinence with the most forbearing courtesy . 
 
  Elizabeth , feeling it incumbent on Elizabeth to relieve Sir William Lucas from so unpleasant a situation , now put Elizabeth forward to confirm Sir William Lucas account , by mentioning Elizabeth prior knowledge of Sir William Lucas account from Charlotte Charlotte ; and endeavoured to put a stop to the exclamations of Elizabeth mother and sisters by the earnestness of Elizabeth congratulations to Sir William Lucas , in which Elizabeth was readily joined by Jane , and by making a variety of remarks on the happiness that might be expected from the match , the excellent character of William Collins , and the convenient distance of Hunsford from London . 
 
  Mother was in fact too much overpowered to say a great deal while Sir William Lucas remained ; but no sooner had Sir William Lucas left Elizabeth mother and sisters than Mother feelings found a rapid vent . In the first place , Mother persisted in disbelieving the whole of the matter ; secondly , Mother was very sure that William Collins had been taken in ; thirdly , Mother trusted that they would never be happy together ; and fourthly , that the match might be broken off . Two inferences , however , were plainly deduced from the whole of the matter : one , that Elizabeth was the real cause of the mischief ; and the other that Mother Mother had been barbarously misused by them all ; and on these two points Mother principally dwelt during the rest of the day . Nothing could console and nothing could appease Mother . Nor did the day wear out Mother resentment . A week elapsed before Mother could see Elizabeth without scolding Elizabeth , a month passed away before Mother could speak to Sir William Lucas or Lady Lucas without being rude , and many months were gone before Mother could at all forgive Elizabeth . 
 
  Father ’s emotions were much more tranquil on the occasion , and such as Father ’s did experience Father ’s pronounced to be of a most agreeable sort ; for it gratified Father ’s , Father ’s said , to discover that Charlotte Lucas , whom Father ’s had been used to think tolerably sensible , was as foolish as Father ’s wife , and more foolish than Father ’s daughter ! 
 
  Jane confessed Jane a little surprised at the match ; but Jane said less of Jane astonishment than of Jane earnest desire for they happiness ; nor could Elizabeth persuade Jane to consider the match as improbable . Kitty and Lydia were far from envying Lady Lucas , for William Collins was only a clergyman ; and the match affected Kitty and Lydia in no other way than as a piece of news to spread at Meryton . 
 
  Lady Lucas could not be insensible of triumph on being able to retort on Mother the comfort of having a daughter well married ; and Lady Lucas called at Longbourn rather oftener than usual to say how happy Lady Lucas was , though Mother ’s sour looks and ill - natured remarks might have been enough to drive happiness away . 
 
  Between Elizabeth and Charlotte there was a restraint which kept Elizabeth and Charlotte mutually silent on the subject ; and Elizabeth felt persuaded that no real confidence could ever subsist between Elizabeth and Charlotte again . Elizabeth disappointment in Charlotte made Elizabeth turn with fonder regard to Elizabeth sister , of whose rectitude and delicacy Elizabeth was sure Elizabeth opinion could never be shaken , and for whose happiness Elizabeth grew daily more anxious , as Charles had now been gone a week and nothing more was heard of Charles return . 
 
  Jane had sent Caroline an early answer to Jane letter , and was counting the days till Jane might reasonably hope to hear again . The promised letter of thanks from William Collins arrived on Tuesday , addressed to Father ’s , and written with all the solemnity of gratitude which a twelvemonth ’s abode in the family might have prompted . After discharging Sir William Lucas conscience on that head , Sir William Lucas proceeded to inform Elizabeth mother and sisters , with many rapturous expressions , of Sir William Lucas happiness in having obtained the affection of Lady Lucas , and then explained that it was merely with the view of enjoying Lady Lucas society that Sir William Lucas had been so ready to close with Elizabeth mother and sisters kind wish of seeing William Collins again at Longbourn , whither Sir William Lucas hoped to be able to return on Monday fortnight ; for Cathleen , Sir William Lucas added , so heartily approved Sir William Lucas marriage , that Cathleen wished Sir William Lucas marriage to take place as soon as possible , which Sir William Lucas trusted would be an unanswerable argument with Sir William Lucas amiable Charlotte to name an early day for making Sir William Lucas the happiest of men . 
 
  William Collins ’s return into Hertfordshire was no longer a matter of pleasure to Mother . On the contrary , Mother was as much disposed to complain of William Collins ’s return into Hertfordshire as Mother husband . It was very strange that William Collins should come to Longbourn instead of to Lucas Lodge ; come was also very inconvenient and exceedingly troublesome . Mother hated having visitors in the house while Mother health was so indifferent , and lovers were of all people the most disagreeable . Such were the gentle murmurs of Mother , and the gentle murmurs of Mother gave way only to the greater distress of Charles ’s continued absence . 
 
  Neither Jane nor Elizabeth were comfortable on Charles ’s continued absence . Day after day passed away without bringing any other tidings of Charles than the report which shortly prevailed in Meryton of Charles coming no more to Netherfield the whole winter ; the report which shortly prevailed in Meryton of Charles coming no more to Netherfield the whole winter . 
 
  Even Elizabeth began to fear — not that Charles was indifferent — but that Charles sisters would be successful in keeping Charles away . Unwilling as Elizabeth was to admit an idea so destructive of Jane ’s happiness , and so dishonorable to the stability of Charles , Elizabeth could not prevent an idea so destructive of Jane ’s happiness , and so dishonorable to the stability of Charles frequently occurring . The united efforts of Charles sisters and of Charles overpowering friend , assisted by the attractions of Georgiana and the amusements of London might be too much , Elizabeth feared , for the strength of Charles attachment . 
 
  As for Jane , Jane anxiety under this suspense was , of course , more painful than Elizabeth ’s , but whatever Jane felt Jane was desirous of concealing , and between Jane and Elizabeth , therefore , Charles ’s continued absence was never alluded to . But as no such delicacy restrained Jane mother , an hour seldom passed in which Mother did not talk of Charles , express Mother impatience for Charles arrival , or even require Jane to confess that if Charles did not come back Mother would think Mother very ill used . It needed all Jane ’s steady mildness to bear these attacks with tolerable tranquillity . 
 
  William Collins returned most punctually on Monday fortnight , but William Collins reception at Longbourn was not quite so gracious as it had been on William Collins first introduction . William Collins was too happy , however , to need much attention ; and luckily for the others , the business of love - making relieved the others from a great deal of William Collins company . The chief of every day was spent by William Collins at Lucas Lodge , and William Collins sometimes returned to Longbourn only in time to make an apology for William Collins absence before the family went to bed . 
 
  Mother was really in a most pitiable state . The very mention of anything concerning the match threw Mother into an agony of ill - humour , and wherever Mother went Mother was sure of hearing the match talked of . The sight of Lady Lucas was odious to Mother . As Mother successor in the house , Mother regarded Lady Lucas with jealous abhorrence . Whenever Charlotte came to see the family , Mother concluded Charlotte to be anticipating the hour of possession ; and whenever Mother spoke in a low voice to William Collins , was convinced that they were talking of the Longbourn estate , and resolving to turn Mother and Mother daughters out of the house , as soon as Father ’s were dead . Mother complained bitterly of all this to Father ’s . 
 
  “ Indeed , Father ’s , ” said Mother , “ it is very hard to think that Charlotte Lucas should ever be mistress of the house , that Mother should be forced to make way for Charlotte , and live to see Charlotte take Charlotte place in the house ! ” 
 
  “ Mother , do not give way to such gloomy thoughts . Let they hope for better things . Let they flatter they that Father ’s may be the survivor . ” 
 
  This was not very consoling to Mother , and therefore , instead of making any answer , Mother went on as before . 
 
  “ Mother can not bear to think that they should have the Longbourn estate . If it was not for the entail , Mother should not mind it . ” 
 
  “ What should not Mother mind ? ” 
 
  “ Mother should not mind anything at all . ” 
 
  “ Let they be thankful that Mother are preserved from a state of such insensibility . ” 
 
  “ Mother never can be thankful , Father ’s , for anything about the entail . How anyone could have the conscience to entail away an estate from one ’s own daughters , Mother can not understand ; and all for the sake of William Collins too ! Why should William Collins have an estate more than anybody else ? ” 
 
  “ Father ’s leave it to Mother to determine , ” said Father ’s . 
 Chapter 
 
  Caroline ’s letter arrived , and put an end to doubt . The very first sentence conveyed the assurance of their being all settled in London for the winter , and concluded with Caroline ’s brother ’s regret at not having had time to pay Caroline ’s brother ’s respects to Caroline ’s brother ’s friends in Hertfordshire before Caroline ’s brother ’s left the country . 
 
  Hope was over , entirely over ; and when Jane could attend to the rest of Caroline ’s letter , Jane found little , except the professed affection of Caroline ’s , that could give Jane any comfort . Georgiana ’s praise occupied the chief of it . Georgiana ’s many attractions were again dwelt on , and Caroline ’s boasted joyfully of their increasing intimacy , and ventured to predict the accomplishment of the wishes which had been unfolded in Caroline ’s former letter . Caroline ’s wrote also with great pleasure of Caroline ’s brother ’s being an inmate of Fitzwilliam ’s house , and mentioned with raptures some plans of Fitzwilliam ’s with regard to new furniture . 
 
  Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this , heard all this in silent indignation . Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this heart was divided between concern for Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this sister , and resentment against all others . To Caroline ’s assertion of Caroline ’s brother ’s being partial to Georgiana ’s Caroline ’s paid no credit . That Caroline ’s brother ’s was really fond of Jane , Caroline ’s doubted no more than Caroline ’s had ever done ; and much as Caroline ’s had always been disposed to like Caroline ’s brother ’s , Caroline ’s could not think without anger , hardly without contempt , on that easiness of temper , that want of proper resolution , which now made Caroline ’s brother ’s the slave of Caroline ’s brother ’s designing friends , and led Caroline ’s brother ’s to sacrifice of Caroline ’s brother ’s own happiness to the caprice of Caroline ’s brother ’s designing friends inclination . Had Caroline ’s brother ’s own happiness , however , been the only sacrifice , Caroline ’s brother ’s might have been allowed to sport with Caroline ’s brother ’s own happiness in whatever manner Caroline ’s brother ’s thought best , but Caroline ’s was involved in it , as Caroline ’s thought Caroline ’s brother ’s must be sensible Caroline ’s brother ’s . It was a subject , in short , on which reflection would be long indulged , and must be unavailing . Caroline ’s could think of nothing else ; and yet whether Charles ’s regard had really died away , or were suppressed by Charles ’s friends ’ interference ; whether Charles ’s had been aware of Jane ’s attachment , or whether Jane ’s attachment had escaped Charles ’s observation ; whatever were the case , though Caroline ’s opinion of Charles ’s must be materially affected by the difference , Caroline ’s situation remained the same , Caroline ’s peace equally wounded . 
 
  A day or two passed before Jane had courage to speak of Jane feelings to Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this ; but at last , on Mother ’s leaving their together , after a longer irritation than usual about Netherfield and Netherfield master , Jane could not help saying : 
 
  “ Oh , that Jane dear mother had more command over Mother ’s ! Mother ’s can have no idea of the pain Mother ’s gives Jane by Mother ’s continual reflections on Netherfield master . But Jane will not repine . It can not last long . Netherfield master will be forgot , and we shall all be as we were before . ” 
 
  Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this looked at Jane with incredulous solicitude , but said nothing . 
 
  “ Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this doubt Jane , ” cried Jane , slightly colouring ; “ indeed , Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this have no reason . Netherfield master may live in Jane memory as the most amiable man of Jane acquaintance , but live is all . Jane have nothing either to hope or fear , and nothing to reproach Netherfield master with . Thank God ! Jane have not that pain . A little time , therefore — Jane shall certainly try to get the better . ” 
 
  With a stronger voice Jane soon added , “ Jane have this comfort immediately , that it has not been more than an error of fancy on Jane side , and that it has done no harm to anyone but Jane . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this dear Jane ! ” exclaimed Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this , “ Jane are too good . Jane sweetness and disinterestedness are really angelic ; Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this do not know what to say to Jane . Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this feel as if Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this had never done Jane justice , or loved Jane as Jane deserve . ” 
 
  Miss Bennet eagerly disclaimed all extraordinary merit , and threw back the praise on Jane warm affection . 
 
  “ Nay , ” said Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this , “ this is not fair . Miss Bennet wish to think all the world respectable , and are hurt if Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this speak ill of anybody . Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this only want to think Miss Bennet perfect , and Miss Bennet set Miss Bennet against think . Do not be afraid of Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this running into any excess , of Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this encroaching on Miss Bennet privilege of universal good - will . Miss Bennet need not . There are few people whom Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this really love , and still fewer of whom Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this think well . The more Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this see of the world , the more am Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this dissatisfied with the world ; and every day confirms Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this belief of the inconsistency of all human characters , and of the little dependence that can be placed on the appearance of merit or sense . Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this have met with two instances lately , one Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this will not mention ; the other is Charlotte ’s marriage . It is unaccountable ! In every view it is unaccountable ! ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this dear Elizabeth , do not give way to such feelings as these . such feelings as these will ruin Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this happiness . Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this do not make allowance enough for difference of situation and temper . Consider William Collins ’s respectability , and Charlotte ’s steady , prudent character . Remember that Charlotte ’s is one of a large family ; that as to fortune , William Collins ’s is a most eligible match ; and be ready to believe , for everybody ’s sake , that Charlotte ’s may feel something like regard and esteem for William Collins ’s . ” 
 
  “ To oblige Miss Bennet , Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this would try to believe almost anything , but no one else could be benefited by such a belief as this ; for were Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this persuaded that Charlotte ’s had any regard for William Collins ’s , Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this should only think worse of Charlotte ’s understanding than Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this now do of Charlotte ’s heart . Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this dear Jane , William Collins ’s is a conceited , pompous , narrow - minded , silly man ; Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this dear Jane know William Collins ’s is , as well as Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this do ; and Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this dear Jane must feel , as well as Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this do , that Charlotte ’s can not have a proper way of thinking . Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this dear Jane shall not defend Charlotte ’s , though it is Charlotte ’s . Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this dear Jane shall not , for the sake of one individual , change the meaning of principle and integrity , nor endeavour to persuade Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this dear Jane or Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this , that selfishness is prudence , and insensibility of danger security for happiness . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this must think Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this language too strong in speaking of both , ” replied Jane ; “ and Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this hope Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this will be convinced of it by seeing them happy together . But enough of this . Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this alluded to something else . Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this mentioned two instances . Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this can not misunderstand Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this , but Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this entreat Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this , Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this , not to pain Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this by thinking William Collins ’s to blame , and saying Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this opinion of William Collins ’s is sunk . We must not be so ready to fancy We intentionally injured . We must not expect a lively young man to be always so guarded and circumspect . It is very often nothing but our own vanity that deceives us . Women fancy admiration means more than admiration does . ” 
 
  “ And men take care that men should . ” 
 
  “ If it is designedly done , men can not be justified ; but Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this have no idea of there being so much design in the world as some persons imagine . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this am far from attributing any part of Charles ’s conduct to design , ” said Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this ; “ but without scheming to do wrong , or to make others unhappy , there may be error , and there may be misery . Thoughtlessness , want of attention to other people ’s feelings , and want of resolution , will do the business . ” 
 
  “ And do Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this impute it to either of Thoughtlessness , want of attention to other people ’s feelings , and want of resolution ? ” 
 
  “ Yes ; to the last . But if Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this go on , Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this shall displease Miss Bennet by saying what Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this think of persons Miss Bennet esteem . Stop Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this whilst Miss Bennet can . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this persist , then , in supposing Charles ’s sisters influence Charles ’s ? ” 
 
  “ Yes , in conjunction with Charles ’s friend . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this can not believe it . Why should Charles ’s sisters try to influence Charles ’s ? Charles ’s sisters can only wish Charles ’s happiness ; and if Charles ’s is attached to Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this , no other woman can secure Charles ’s happiness . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this first position is false . Charles ’s sisters may wish many things besides Charles ’s happiness ; Charles ’s sisters may wish Charles ’s increase of wealth and consequence ; Charles ’s sisters may wish Charles ’s to marry a girl who has all the importance of money , great connections , and pride . ” 
 
  “ Beyond a doubt , Charles ’s sisters do wish Charles ’s to choose Georgiana ’s , ” replied Jane ; “ but wish may be from better feelings than Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this are supposing . Charles ’s sisters have known Georgiana ’s much longer than Charles ’s sisters have known Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this ; no wonder if Charles ’s sisters love Georgiana ’s better . But , whatever may be Charles ’s sisters own wishes , it is very unlikely Charles ’s sisters should have opposed Charles ’s . What sister would think herself at liberty to do it , unless there were something very objectionable ? If Charles ’s sisters believed Charles ’s attached to Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this , Charles ’s sisters would not try to part their ; if Charles ’s were so , Charles ’s sisters could not succeed . By supposing such an affection , Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this make everybody acting unnaturally and wrong , and Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this most unhappy . Do not distress Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this by the idea . Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this am not ashamed of having been mistaken — or , at least , it is light , it is nothing in comparison of what Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this should feel in thinking ill of Charles ’s or Charles ’s sisters . Let Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this take it in the best light , in the light in which it may be understood . ” 
 
  Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this could not oppose such a wish ; and from this time Charles ’s name was scarcely ever mentioned between their . 
 
  Mother ’s still continued to wonder and repine at Charles ’s returning no more , and though a day seldom passed in which Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this did not account for it clearly , there was little chance of Mother ’s ever considering it with less perplexity . Mother ’s daughter endeavoured to convince Mother ’s of what Mother ’s did not believe Mother ’s , that Charles ’s attentions to Jane had been merely the effect of a common and transient liking , which ceased when Charles ’s saw Jane no more ; but though the probability of the statement was admitted at the time , Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this had the same story to repeat every day . Mother ’s best comfort was that Charles ’s must be down again in the summer . 
 
  Father treated the matter differently . “ So , Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this , ” said Father one day , “ Caroline ’s is crossed in love , Father find . Father congratulate Caroline ’s . Next to being married , a girl likes to be crossed a little in love now and then . be is something to think of , and be gives a girl a sort of distinction among a girl companions . When is Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this turn to come ? Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this will hardly bear to be long outdone by Jane . Now is Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this time . Here are officers enough in Meryton to disappoint all the young ladies in the country . Let George be Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this man . George is a pleasant fellow , and would jilt Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this creditably . ” 
 
  “ Thank Father , Father , but a less agreeable man would satisfy Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this . We must not all expect Jane ’s good fortune . ” 
 
  “ True , ” said Father , “ but it is a comfort to think that whatever of that kind may befall Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this , Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this have an affectionate mother who will make the most of it . ” 
 
  Charles ’s society was of material service in dispelling the gloom which the late perverse occurrences had thrown on many of the Longbourn family . many of the Longbourn family saw Charles ’s often , and to Charles ’s other recommendations was now added that of general unreserve . The whole of what Elizabeth , to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this had already heard , Charles ’s claims on Fitzwilliam ’s , and all that Charles ’s had suffered from Fitzwilliam ’s , was now openly acknowledged and publicly canvassed ; and everybody was pleased to know how much everybody had always disliked Fitzwilliam ’s before everybody had known anything of the matter . Miss Bennet Miss Bennet was the only creature who could suppose there might be any extenuating circumstances in the case , unknown to the society of Hertfordshire ; Miss Bennet mild and steady candour always pleaded for allowances , and urged the possibility of mistakes — but by everybody else Fitzwilliam ’s was condemned as the worst of men . 
 Chapter 
 
  After a week spent in professions of love and schemes of felicity , William Collins was called from William Collins amiable Charlotte by the arrival of Saturday . The pain of separation , however , might be alleviated on William Collins side , by preparations for the reception of William Collins bride ; as William Collins had reason to hope , that shortly after William Collins return into Hertfordshire , the day would be fixed that was to make William Collins the happiest of men . William Collins took leave of William Collins relations at Longbourn with as much solemnity as before ; wished William Collins fair cousins health and happiness again , and promised William Collins fair cousins father another letter of thanks . 
 
  On the following Monday , Mother had the pleasure of receiving Mother brother and Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn . Mother brother was a sensible , gentlemanlike man , greatly superior to Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn , as well by nature as education . The Netherfield ladies would have had difficulty in believing that a man who lived by trade , and within view of Mother brother own warehouses , could have been so well - bred and agreeable . Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn , was an amiable , intelligent , elegant woman , and a great favourite with all Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn Longbourn nieces . Between the two eldest and Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn especially , there subsisted a particular regard . the two eldest had frequently been staying with Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn in town . 
 
  The first part of Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn business on Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn arrival was to distribute Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn presents and describe the newest fashions . When The first part of Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn business on Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn arrival was done Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn had a less active part to play . It became Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn turn to listen . Mother had many grievances to relate , and much to complain of . They had all been very ill - used since Mother last saw Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn . Two of Mother girls had been upon the point of marriage , and after all there was nothing in it . 
 
  “ Mother do not blame Jane , ” Mother continued , “ for Jane would have got Charles if Jane could . But Elizabeth ! Oh , sister ! It is very hard to think that Elizabeth ! might have been William Collins ’s wife by this time , had it not been for Elizabeth ! own perverseness . William Collins made Elizabeth ! an offer in this very room , and Elizabeth ! refused William Collins . The consequence of it is , that Lady Lucas will have a daughter married before Mother have , and that the Longbourn estate is just as much entailed as ever . Lady Lucas are very artful people indeed , Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn . Lady Lucas are all for what Lady Lucas can get . Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with sister am sorry to say it of Lady Lucas , but so it is . It makes Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with sister very nervous and poorly , to be thwarted so in Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with sister own family , and to have neighbours who think of themselves before anybody else . However , Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn coming just at this time is the greatest of comforts , and Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with sister am very glad to hear what Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn tell us , of long sleeves . ” 
 
  Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with , made Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with sister a slight answer , and , in compassion to all Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn Longbourn nieces , turned the conversation . 
 
  When alone with Elizabeth ! afterwards , Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with spoke more on the subject . “ It seems likely to have been a desirable match for Jane , ” said Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with . “ Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with am sorry it went off . But these things happen so often ! A young man , such as Elizabeth ! describe Charles , so easily falls in love with a pretty girl for a few weeks , and when accident separates them , so easily forgets a pretty girl , that these sort of inconsistencies are very frequent . ” 
 
  “ An excellent consolation in its way , ” said Elizabeth ! , “ but its will not do for us . We do not suffer by accident . It does not often happen that the interference of friends will persuade a young man of independent fortune to think no more of a girl whom a young man of independent fortune was violently in love with only a few days before . ” 
 
  “ But that expression of ‘ violently in love ’ is so hackneyed , so doubtful , so indefinite , that that expression of ‘ violently in love ’ gives Elizabeth ! very little idea . that expression of ‘ violently in love ’ is as often applied to feelings which arise from a half - hour ’s acquaintance , as to a real , strong attachment . Pray , how violent was Charles ’s love ? ” 
 
  “ Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with never saw a more promising inclination ; Charles was growing quite inattentive to other people , and wholly engrossed by Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn . Every time they met , Charles ’s love was more decided and remarkable . At Charles own ball Charles offended two or three young ladies , by not asking two or three young ladies to dance ; and Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with spoke to Charles twice Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with , without receiving an answer . Could there be finer symptoms ? Is not general incivility the very essence of love ? ” 
 
  “ Oh , yes!—of that kind of love which Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with suppose Charles to have felt . Poor Jane ! Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with am sorry for Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn , because , with Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn disposition , Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn may not get over am immediately . am had better have happened to Elizabeth ! , Elizabeth ! ; Elizabeth ! would have laughed Elizabeth ! out of am sooner . But do Elizabeth ! think Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn would be prevailed upon to go back with us ? Change of scene might be of service — and perhaps a little relief from home may be as useful as anything . ” 
 
  Elizabeth ! was exceedingly pleased with this proposal , and felt persuaded of Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn ready acquiescence . 
 
  “ Elizabeth ! hope , ” added Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn , “ that no consideration with regard to Charles will influence Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn . We live in so different a part of town , all We connections are so different , and , as Mother brother wife , who came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn well know , we go out so little , that it is very improbable that they should meet at all , unless Charles really comes to see Jane . ” 
 
  “ And comes is quite impossible ; for Charles is now in the custody of Charles friend , and Fitzwilliam would no more suffer Charles to call on Jane in such a part of London ! Elizabeth ! dear aunt , how could Elizabeth ! think of it ? Fitzwilliam may perhaps have heard of such a place as Gracechurch Street , but Fitzwilliam would hardly think a month ’s ablution enough to cleanse Fitzwilliam from such a place as Gracechurch Street impurities , were Fitzwilliam once to enter such a place as Gracechurch Street ; and depend upon it , Charles never stirs without Charles . ” 
 
  “ So much the better . Elizabeth ! hope they will not meet at all . But does not Jane correspond with Charles sister ? Jane will not be able to help calling . ” 
 
  “ Jane will drop the acquaintance entirely . ” 
 
  But in spite of the certainty in which Elizabeth ! affected to place this point , as well as the still more interesting one of Charles ’s being withheld from seeing Jane , Elizabeth ! felt a solicitude on the subject which convinced Elizabeth ! , on examination , that Elizabeth ! did not consider it entirely hopeless . It was possible , and sometimes Elizabeth ! thought it probable , that Charles affection might be reanimated , and the influence of Charles friends successfully combated by the more natural influence of Jane ’s attractions . 
 
  Miss Bennet accepted Elizabeth ! invitation with pleasure ; and the Bingleys were no otherwise in Miss Bennet thoughts at the same time , than as Miss Bennet hoped by Caroline ’s not living in the same house with Miss Bennet brother , Miss Bennet might occasionally spend a morning with Miss Bennet brother , without any danger of seeing Miss Bennet brother . 
 
  The Gardiners stayed a week at Longbourn ; and what with the Phillipses , Lady Lucas , and the officers , there was not a day without its engagement . Mother had so carefully provided for the entertainment of Mother brother and sister , that Mother brother and sister did not once sit down to a family dinner . When its engagement was for home , some of the officers always made part of its engagement — of which officers Charlie was sure to be one ; and on these occasions , Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with , rendered suspicious by Elizabeth ! warm commendation , narrowly observed they . Without supposing they , from what Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with saw , to be very seriously in love , they preference of each other was plain enough to make Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with a little uneasy ; and Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with resolved to speak to Elizabeth ! on the subject before Elizabeth ! left Hertfordshire , and represent to Elizabeth ! the imprudence of encouraging such an attachment . 
 
  To Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with , George had one means of affording pleasure , unconnected with George general powers . About ten or a dozen years ago , before Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with marriage , Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with had spent a considerable time in that very part of Derbyshire to which George belonged . They had , therefore , many acquaintances in common ; and though George had been little there since the death of Fitzwilliam ’s father , it was yet in George power to give Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with fresher intelligence of Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with former friends than Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with had been in the way of procuring . 
 
  Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with had seen Pemberley , and known the late Fitzwilliam by character perfectly well . Here consequently was an inexhaustible subject of discourse . In comparing Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with recollection of Pemberley with the minute description which George could give , and in bestowing Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with tribute of praise on the character of Pemberley late possessor , Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with was delighting both George and Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with . On being made acquainted with the present Fitzwilliam ’s treatment of Fitzwilliam , Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with tried to remember some of Fitzwilliam reputed disposition when quite a lad which might agree with it , and was confident at last that Madeline , to whom the chief of this news had been given before , in the course of Jane and Elizabeth ’s correspondence with recollected having heard Mr. Fitzwilliam formerly spoken of as a very proud , ill - natured boy . 
 Chapter 
 
  Madeline ’s caution to Elizabeth was punctually and kindly given on the first favourable opportunity of speaking to Elizabeth alone ; after honestly telling Elizabeth what Madeline ’s thought , Madeline ’s thus went on : 
 
  “ Elizabeth are too sensible a girl , Elizabeth , to fall in love merely because Elizabeth are warned against fall ; and , therefore , Madeline ’s am not afraid of speaking openly . Seriously , Madeline ’s would have Elizabeth be on Elizabeth guard . Do not involve Elizabeth or endeavour to involve Charlie in an affection which the want of fortune would make so very imprudent . Madeline ’s have nothing to say against Charlie ; Charlie is a most interesting young man ; and if Charlie had the fortune Charlie ought to have , Madeline ’s should think Elizabeth could not do better . But as it is , Elizabeth must not let Elizabeth fancy run away with Elizabeth . Elizabeth have sense , and we all expect Elizabeth to use sense . Elizabeth father would depend on Elizabeth resolution and good conduct , Madeline ’s am sure . Elizabeth must not disappoint Elizabeth father . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth dear aunt , Madeline ’s is being serious indeed . ” 
 
  “ Yes , and Madeline ’s hope to engage Elizabeth to be serious likewise . ” 
 
  “ Well , then , Madeline ’s need not be under any alarm . Elizabeth will take care of Elizabeth , and of Charlie too . Charlie shall not be in love with Elizabeth , if Elizabeth can prevent be . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth , Elizabeth are not serious now . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth beg Madeline ’s pardon , Elizabeth will try again . At present Elizabeth am not in love with Charlie ; no , Elizabeth certainly am not . But Charlie is , beyond all comparison , the most agreeable man Elizabeth ever saw — and if Charlie becomes really attached to Elizabeth — Elizabeth believe it will be better that Charlie should not . Elizabeth see the imprudence of it . Oh ! that abominable Fitzwilliam ! Elizabeth father opinion of Elizabeth does Elizabeth the greatest honour , and Elizabeth should be miserable to forfeit the greatest honour . Elizabeth father , however , is partial to Charlie . In short , Madeline ’s , Elizabeth should be very sorry to be the means of making any of Madeline ’s unhappy ; but since we see every day that where there is affection , young people are seldom withheld by immediate want of fortune from entering into engagements with each other , how can Elizabeth promise to be wiser than so many of Elizabeth fellow - creatures if Elizabeth am tempted , or how am Elizabeth even to know that it would be wisdom to resist ? All that Elizabeth can promise Madeline ’s , therefore , is not to be in a hurry . Elizabeth will not be in a hurry to believe Elizabeth Charlie first object . When Elizabeth am in company with Charlie , Elizabeth will not be wishing . In short , Elizabeth will do Elizabeth best . ” 
 
  “ Perhaps it will be as well if Elizabeth discourage Charlie coming here so very often . At least , Elizabeth should not remind Elizabeth mother of inviting Charlie . ” 
 
  “ As Elizabeth did the other day , ” said Elizabeth with a conscious smile : “ very true , it will be wise in Elizabeth to refrain from remind . But do not imagine that Charlie is always here so often . It is on Madeline ’s account that Charlie has been so frequently invited this week . Madeline ’s know Elizabeth mother ideas as to the necessity of constant company for Elizabeth mother friends . But really , and upon Elizabeth honour , Elizabeth will try to do what Elizabeth think to be the wisest ; and now Elizabeth hope Madeline ’s are satisfied . ” 
 
  Madeline ’s assured Elizabeth that Madeline ’s was , and Elizabeth having thanked Madeline ’s for the kindness of Madeline ’s hints , they parted ; a wonderful instance of advice being given on such a point , without being resented . 
 
  Charlie returned into Hertfordshire soon after it had been quitted by the Gardiners and Jane ; but as Charlie took up Charlie abode with the Lucases , Charlie arrival was no great inconvenience to Elizabeth mother . Charlie marriage was now fast approaching , and Elizabeth mother was at length so far resigned as to think Charlie marriage inevitable , and even repeatedly to say , in an ill - natured tone , that Elizabeth mother “ wished they might be happy . ” Thursday was to be the wedding day , and on Wednesday Elizabeth mother paid Elizabeth mother farewell visit ; and when Elizabeth mother rose to take leave , Elizabeth , ashamed of Elizabeth mother ungracious and reluctant good wishes , and sincerely affected Elizabeth , accompanied Elizabeth mother out of the room . As they went downstairs together , Charlotte said : 
 
  “ Charlotte shall depend on hearing from Elizabeth very often , Elizabeth . ” 
 
  “ That Charlotte certainly shall . ” 
 
  “ And Charlotte have another favour to ask Elizabeth . Will Elizabeth come and see Charlotte ? ” 
 
  “ We shall often meet , Elizabeth hope , in Hertfordshire . ” 
 
  “ Charlotte am not likely to leave Kent for some time . Promise Charlotte , therefore , to come to Hunsford . ” 
 
  Elizabeth could not refuse , though Elizabeth foresaw little pleasure in come . 
 
  “ Elizabeth father and Maria are coming to Charlotte in March , ” added Charlotte , “ and Charlotte hope Elizabeth will consent to be of the party . Indeed , Elizabeth , Elizabeth will be as welcome as either of Elizabeth father and Maria . ” 
 
  Charlie marriage took place ; the bride and bridegroom set off for Kent from the church door , and everybody had as much to say , or to hear , on the subject as usual . Elizabeth soon heard from Elizabeth friend ; and their correspondence was as regular and frequent as their correspondence had ever been ; that their correspondence should be equally unreserved was impossible . Elizabeth could never address Charlotte without feeling that all the comfort of intimacy was over , and though determined not to slacken as a correspondent , slacken was for the sake of what had been , rather than what was . Charlotte ’s first letters were received with a good deal of eagerness ; there could not but be curiosity to know how Charlotte would speak of Charlotte new home , how Charlotte would like Cathleen , and how happy Charlotte would dare pronounce Charlotte to be ; though , when Charlotte ’s first letters were read , Elizabeth felt that Charlotte expressed Charlotte on every point exactly as Elizabeth might have foreseen . Charlotte wrote cheerfully , seemed surrounded with comforts , and mentioned nothing which Charlotte could not praise . The house , furniture , neighbourhood , and roads , were all to Charlotte taste , and Cathleen ’s behaviour was most friendly and obliging . It was Charlie picture of Hunsford and Rosings rationally softened ; and Elizabeth perceived that Elizabeth must wait for Elizabeth own visit there to know the rest . 
 
  Jane had already written a few lines to Jane sister to announce Caroline and Mrs. Hurst safe arrival in London ; and when Jane wrote again , Elizabeth hoped it would be in Elizabeth power to say something of the Bingleys . 
 
  Elizabeth impatience for this second letter was as well rewarded as impatience generally is . Jane had been a week in town without either seeing or hearing from Caroline . Jane accounted for been , however , by supposing that Jane last letter to Jane friend from Longbourn had by some accident been lost . 
 
  “ Jane aunt , ” Jane continued , “ is going to - morrow into that part of London , and Jane shall take the opportunity of calling in Grosvenor Street . ” 
 
  Jane wrote again when the visit was paid , and Jane had seen Caroline . “ Elizabeth did not think Caroline in spirits , ” were Jane words , “ but Caroline was very glad to see Elizabeth , and reproached Elizabeth for giving Caroline no notice of Elizabeth coming to London . Elizabeth was right , therefore , Elizabeth last letter had never reached Caroline . Elizabeth enquired after Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother , of course . Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother was well , but so much engaged with that abominable Fitzwilliam that Caroline and Mrs. Hurst scarcely ever saw Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother . Elizabeth found that Georgiana was expected to dinner . Elizabeth wish Elizabeth could see Georgiana . Elizabeth visit was not long , as Caroline and Mrs. Hurst were going out . Elizabeth dare say Elizabeth shall see Caroline and Mrs. Hurst soon here . ” Elizabeth Elizabeth shook Elizabeth head over this second letter . this second letter convinced Elizabeth that accident only could discover to Charlotte Elizabeth sister ’s being in town . 
 
  Four weeks passed away , and Jane saw nothing of Charlie . Jane endeavoured to persuade Jane that Jane did not regret it ; but Jane could no longer be blind to Caroline ’s inattention . After waiting at home every morning for a fortnight , and inventing every evening a fresh excuse for Jane , Jane did at last appear ; but the shortness of Jane stay , and yet more , the alteration of Jane manner would allow Jane to deceive Jane no longer . The letter which Jane wrote on this occasion to Jane sister will prove what Jane felt . 
 
  “ Elizabeth dearest Elizabeth will , Elizabeth am sure , be incapable of triumphing in Elizabeth better judgement , at Elizabeth expense , when Elizabeth confess Elizabeth to have been entirely deceived in Caroline ’s regard for Elizabeth . But , Elizabeth dear sister , though the event has proved Elizabeth right , do not think Elizabeth obstinate if Elizabeth still assert that , considering what Caroline behaviour was , Elizabeth confidence was as natural as Elizabeth suspicion . Elizabeth do not at all comprehend Caroline reason for wishing to be intimate with Elizabeth ; but if the same circumstances were to happen again , Elizabeth am sure Elizabeth should be deceived again . Caroline did not return Elizabeth visit till yesterday ; and not a note , not a line , did Elizabeth receive in the meantime . When Caroline did come , it was very evident that Caroline had no pleasure in come ; Caroline made a slight , formal apology , for not calling before , said not a word of wishing to see Elizabeth again , and was in every respect so altered a creature , that when Caroline went away Elizabeth was perfectly resolved to continue the acquaintance no longer . Elizabeth pity , though Elizabeth can not help blaming Caroline . Caroline was very wrong in singling Elizabeth out as Caroline did ; Elizabeth can safely say that every advance to intimacy began on Caroline side . But Elizabeth pity Caroline , because Caroline must feel that Caroline has been acting wrong , and because Elizabeth am very sure that anxiety for Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother is the cause of acting . Elizabeth need not explain Elizabeth farther ; and though we know that anxiety for Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother to be quite needless , yet if Caroline feels that anxiety for Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother , that anxiety for Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother will easily account for Caroline behaviour to Elizabeth ; and so deservedly dear as Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother is to Caroline , whatever anxiety Caroline must feel on Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother behalf is natural and amiable . Elizabeth can not but wonder , however , at Caroline having any such fears now , because , if Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother had at all cared about Elizabeth , we must have met , long ago . Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother knows of Elizabeth being in town , Elizabeth am certain , from something Caroline said Caroline ; and yet it would seem , by Caroline manner of talking , as if Caroline wanted to persuade Caroline that Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother is really partial to Georgiana . Elizabeth can not understand it . If Elizabeth were not afraid of judging harshly , Elizabeth should be almost tempted to say that there is a strong appearance of duplicity in all this . But Elizabeth will endeavour to banish every painful thought , and think only of what will make Elizabeth happy — Madeline ’s affection , and the invariable kindness of Elizabeth dear uncle and aunt . Let Elizabeth hear from Madeline ’s very soon . Caroline said something of Caroline never returning to Netherfield again , of giving up the house , but not with any certainty . We had better not mention it . Elizabeth am extremely glad that Madeline ’s have such pleasant accounts from our friends at Hunsford . Pray go to see our friends at Hunsford , with Sir William and Maria . Elizabeth am sure Madeline ’s will be very comfortable there.—Yours , etc . ” 
 
  this second letter gave Elizabeth some pain ; but Elizabeth spirits returned as Elizabeth considered that Jane would no longer be duped , by Caroline at least . All expectation from Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother was now absolutely over . Jane would not even wish for a renewal of Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother attentions . Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother character sunk on every review of Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother character ; and as a punishment for Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother , as well as a possible advantage to Jane , Elizabeth seriously hoped Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother might really soon marry that abominable Fitzwilliam sister , as by George ’s account , she would make Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother abundantly regret what Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother had thrown away . 
 
  Madeline about this time reminded Elizabeth of Elizabeth promise concerning Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother , and required information ; and Elizabeth had such to send as might rather give contentment to Elizabeth aunt than to Elizabeth . Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother apparent partiality had subsided , Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother attentions were over , Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother was the admirer of some one else . Elizabeth was watchful enough to see it all , but Elizabeth could see it all and write of it all without material pain . Elizabeth heart had been but slightly touched , and Elizabeth vanity was satisfied with believing that Elizabeth would have been Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother only choice , had fortune permitted been . The sudden acquisition of ten thousand pounds was the most remarkable charm of Elizabeth ; but Elizabeth , less clear - sighted perhaps in this case than in Charlotte ’s , did not quarrel with Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother for Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother wish of independence . Nothing , on the contrary , could be more natural ; and while able to suppose that it cost Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother a few struggles to relinquish Elizabeth , Elizabeth was ready to allow relinquish a wise and desirable measure for both , and could very sincerely wish Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother happy . 
 
  All this was acknowledged to Madeline ’s ; and after relating the circumstances , Elizabeth thus went on : “ Elizabeth am now convinced , Madeline ’s , that Elizabeth have never been much in love ; for had Elizabeth really experienced that pure and elevating passion , Elizabeth should at present detest Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother very name , and wish Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother all manner of evil . But Elizabeth feelings are not only cordial towards Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother ; Elizabeth feelings are even impartial towards Caroline . Elizabeth can not find out that Elizabeth hate Caroline at all , or that Elizabeth am in the least unwilling to think Caroline a very good sort of girl . There can be no love in all this . Elizabeth watchfulness has been effectual ; and though Elizabeth certainly should be a more interesting object to all Elizabeth acquaintances were Elizabeth distractedly in love with Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother , Elizabeth can not say that Elizabeth regret Elizabeth comparative insignificance . Importance may sometimes be purchased too dearly . Caroline and Mrs. Hurst take Caroline and Mrs. Hurst brother defection much more to heart than Elizabeth do . Caroline and Mrs. Hurst are young in the ways of the world , and not yet open to the mortifying conviction that handsome young men must have something to live on as well as the plain . ” 
 Chapter 
 
  With no greater events than these in the Longbourn family , and otherwise diversified by little beyond the walks to Meryton , sometimes dirty and sometimes cold , did January and February pass away . March was to take Elizabeth to Hunsford . Elizabeth had not at first thought very seriously of going thither ; but Charlotte , Elizabeth soon found , was depending on the plan and Elizabeth gradually learned to consider the plan Elizabeth with greater pleasure as well as greater certainty . Absence had increased Elizabeth desire of seeing Charlotte again , and weakened Elizabeth disgust of William Collins . There was novelty in the plan , and as , with such a mother and such uncompanionable sisters , home could not be faultless , a little change was not unwelcome for a little change own sake . The journey would moreover give Elizabeth a peep at Jane ; and , in short , as the time drew near , Elizabeth would have been very sorry for any delay . Everything , however , went on smoothly , and was finally settled according to Charlotte ’s first sketch . Elizabeth was to accompany William Collins and William Collins second daughter . The improvement of spending a night in London was added in time , and the plan became perfect as plan could be . 
 
  The only pain was in leaving Elizabeth father , who would certainly miss Elizabeth , and who , when it came to the point , so little liked Elizabeth going , that he told Elizabeth to write to he , and almost promised to answer Elizabeth letter . 
 
  The farewell between Elizabeth and Charlotte was perfectly friendly ; on William Collins side even more . William Collins present pursuit could not make William Collins forget that Elizabeth had been the first to excite and to deserve William Collins attention , the first to listen and to pity , the first to be admired ; and in William Collins manner of bidding Elizabeth adieu , wishing Elizabeth every enjoyment , reminding Elizabeth of what Elizabeth was to expect in Cathleen , and trusting their opinion of Elizabeth — their opinion of everybody — would always coincide , there was a solicitude , an interest which Elizabeth felt must ever attach Elizabeth to William Collins with a most sincere regard ; and Elizabeth parted from William Collins convinced that , whether married or single , William Collins must always be Elizabeth model of the amiable and pleasing . 
 
  Elizabeth fellow - travellers the next day were not of a kind to make Elizabeth think William Collins less agreeable . William Collins , and William Collins second daughter , had nothing to say that could be worth hearing , and were listened to with about as much delight as the rattle of the chaise . Elizabeth loved absurdities , but Elizabeth had known William Collins too long . William Collins could tell Elizabeth nothing new of the wonders of William Collins presentation and knighthood ; and William Collins civilities were worn out , like William Collins information . 
 
  It was a journey of only twenty - four miles , and they began it so early as to be in Gracechurch Street by noon . As they drove to Edward ’s door , Jane was at a drawing - room window watching they arrival ; when they entered the passage Jane was there to welcome they , and Elizabeth , looking earnestly in Elizabeth face , was pleased to see Elizabeth face healthful and lovely as ever . On the stairs were a troop of little boys and girls , whose eagerness for Elizabeth appearance would not allow their to wait in the drawing - room , and whose shyness , as their had not seen Elizabeth for a twelvemonth , prevented their coming lower . All was joy and kindness . The day passed most pleasantly away ; the morning in bustle and shopping , and the evening at one of the theatres . 
 
  Elizabeth then contrived to sit by Elizabeth aunt . Their first object was Jane ; and Elizabeth was more grieved than astonished to hear , in reply to Elizabeth minute enquiries , that though Jane always struggled to support Jane spirits , there were periods of dejection . It was reasonable , however , to hope that they would not continue long . Madeline gave Elizabeth the particulars also of Caroline ’s visit in Gracechurch Street , and repeated conversations occurring at different times between Jane and Elizabeth , which proved that Jane had , from Jane heart , given up the acquaintance . 
 
  Madeline then rallied Elizabeth on George ’s desertion , and complimented Elizabeth on bearing George ’s desertion so well . 
 
  “ But Madeline dear Elizabeth , ” Madeline added , “ what sort of girl is William Collins second daughter ? Madeline should be sorry to think our friend mercenary . ” 
 
  “ Pray , Elizabeth dear aunt , what is the difference in matrimonial affairs , between the mercenary and the prudent motive ? Where does discretion end , and avarice begin ? Last Christmas Madeline were afraid of George ’s marrying Elizabeth , because marrying would be imprudent ; and now , because George ’s is trying to get a girl with only ten thousand pounds , Madeline want to find out that George ’s is mercenary . ” 
 
  “ If Madeline will only tell Elizabeth what sort of girl William Collins second daughter is , Elizabeth shall know what to think . ” 
 
  “ William Collins second daughter is a very good kind of girl , Madeline believe . Madeline know no harm of William Collins second daughter . ” 
 
  “ But George ’s paid William Collins second daughter not the smallest attention till William Collins second daughter grandfather ’s death made William Collins second daughter mistress of this fortune . ” 
 
  “ No — why should George ’s ? If it were not allowable for George ’s to gain Elizabeth affections because Elizabeth had no money , what occasion could there be for making love to a girl whom George ’s did not care about , and who was equally poor ? ” 
 
  “ But there seems an indelicacy in directing George ’s attentions towards William Collins second daughter so soon after this event . ” 
 
  “ A man in distressed circumstances has not time for all those elegant decorums which other people may observe . If William Collins second daughter does not object to directing , why should we ? ” 
 
  “ William Collins second daughter not objecting does not justify George ’s . William Collins second daughter not objecting only shows William Collins second daughter being deficient in something William Collins second daughter — sense or feeling . ” 
 
  “ Well , ” cried Elizabeth , “ have it as Madeline choose . George ’s shall be mercenary , and William Collins second daughter shall be foolish . ” 
 
  “ No , Elizabeth , that is what Madeline do not choose . Madeline should be sorry , Elizabeth know , to think ill of a young man who has lived so long in Derbyshire . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! if that is all , Elizabeth have a very poor opinion of young men who live in Derbyshire ; and young men who live in Derbyshire intimate friends who live in Hertfordshire are not much better . Elizabeth am sick of them all . Thank Heaven ! Elizabeth am going to - morrow where Elizabeth shall find a man who has not one agreeable quality , who has neither manner nor sense to recommend a man who has not one agreeable quality , who has neither manner nor sense to recommend . Stupid men are the only ones worth knowing , after all . ” 
 
  “ Take care , Elizabeth ; that speech savours strongly of disappointment . ” 
 
  Before they were separated by the conclusion of the play , Elizabeth had the unexpected happiness of an invitation to accompany Elizabeth uncle and aunt in a tour of pleasure which Elizabeth uncle and aunt proposed taking in the summer . 
 
  “ Elizabeth uncle and aunt have not determined how far a tour of pleasure which Elizabeth uncle and aunt proposed taking in the summer shall carry Elizabeth uncle and aunt , ” said Madeline , “ but , perhaps , to the Lakes . ” 
 
  No scheme could have been more agreeable to Elizabeth , and Elizabeth acceptance of an invitation to accompany Elizabeth uncle and aunt in a tour of pleasure which Elizabeth uncle and aunt proposed taking in the summer was most ready and grateful . “ Oh , Madeline , ” Elizabeth rapturously cried , “ what delight ! what felicity ! Madeline give Elizabeth fresh life and vigour . Adieu to disappointment and spleen . What are young men to rocks and mountains ? Oh ! what hours of transport Elizabeth uncle and aunt shall spend ! And when Elizabeth uncle and aunt do return , it shall not be like other travellers , without being able to give one accurate idea of anything . Elizabeth uncle and aunt will know where Elizabeth uncle and aunt have gone — Elizabeth uncle and aunt will recollect what Elizabeth uncle and aunt have seen . Lakes , mountains , and rivers shall not be jumbled together in Elizabeth uncle and aunt imaginations ; nor when Elizabeth uncle and aunt attempt to describe any particular scene , will Elizabeth uncle and aunt begin quarreling about any particular scene relative situation . Let Elizabeth uncle and aunt first effusions be less insupportable than those of the generality of travellers . ” 
 Chapter 
 
  Every object in the next day ’s journey was new and interesting to Elizabeth ; and Elizabeth spirits were in a state of enjoyment ; for Elizabeth had seen Elizabeth sister looking so well as to banish all fear for Elizabeth sister health , and the prospect of Elizabeth sister northern tour was a constant source of delight . 
 
  When they left the high road for the lane to Hunsford , every eye was in search of the Parsonage , and every turning expected to bring the Parsonage in view . The palings of Rosings Park was they boundary on one side . Elizabeth smiled at the recollection of all that Elizabeth had heard of the Parsonage inhabitants . 
 
  At length the Parsonage was discernible . The garden sloping to the road , the Parsonage standing in The garden sloping to the road , the green pales , and the laurel hedge , everything declared they were arriving . William Collins and Charlotte appeared at the door , and the carriage stopped at the small gate which led by a short gravel walk to the Parsonage , amidst the nods and smiles of the whole party . In a moment the whole party were all out of the chaise , rejoicing at the sight of each other . William Collins welcomed Elizabeth with the liveliest pleasure , and Elizabeth was more and more satisfied with coming when Elizabeth found Elizabeth so affectionately received . Elizabeth saw instantly that Elizabeth cousin ’s manners were not altered by William Collins marriage ; William Collins formal civility was just what William Collins formal civility had been , and William Collins detained Elizabeth some minutes at the small gate which led by a short gravel walk to the Parsonage to hear and satisfy William Collins enquiries after all Elizabeth family . the ladies were then , with no other delay than William Collins pointing out the neatness of the entrance , taken into the Parsonage ; and as soon as the ladies were in the parlour , William Collins welcomed the ladies a second time , with ostentatious formality to the Parsonage , and punctually repeated all William Collins wife ’s offers of refreshment . 
 
  Elizabeth was prepared to see William Collins in William Collins glory ; and Elizabeth could not help in fancying that in displaying the good proportion of the room , the room aspect and the room furniture , William Collins addressed William Collins particularly to Elizabeth , as if wishing to make Elizabeth feel what Elizabeth had lost in refusing William Collins . But though everything seemed neat and comfortable , Elizabeth was not able to gratify William Collins by any sigh of repentance , and rather looked with wonder at Elizabeth friend that Elizabeth could have so cheerful an air with such a companion . When William Collins said anything of which William Collins wife might reasonably be ashamed , which certainly was not unseldom , Elizabeth involuntarily turned Elizabeth eye on Charlotte . Once or twice Elizabeth could discern a faint blush ; but in general Charlotte wisely did not hear . After sitting long enough to admire every article of furniture in the room , from the sideboard to the fender , to give an account of the ladies journey , and of all that had happened in Hunsford , William Collins invited the ladies to take a stroll in the garden , which was large and well laid out , and to the cultivation of which William Collins attended William Collins . To work in the garden , which was large and well laid out , and to the cultivation of which William Collins attended William Collins was one of William Collins most respectable pleasures ; and Elizabeth admired the command of countenance with which Charlotte talked of the healthfulness of the exercise , and owned Charlotte encouraged the exercise as much as possible . Here , leading the way through every walk and cross walk , and scarcely allowing the ladies an interval to utter the praises William Collins asked for , every view was pointed out with a minuteness which left beauty entirely behind . William Collins could number the fields in every direction , and could tell how many trees there were in the most distant clump . But of all the views which William Collins garden , or which the country or kingdom could boast , none were to be compared with the prospect of Rosings , afforded by an opening in the trees that bordered the park nearly opposite the front of the Parsonage . the Parsonage was a handsome modern building , well situated on rising ground . 
 
  From the garden , which was large and well laid out , and to the cultivation of which William Collins attended William Collins , William Collins would have led the ladies round William Collins two meadows ; but the ladies , not having shoes to encounter the remains of a white frost , turned back ; and while William Collins accompanied William Collins , Charlotte took Charlotte sister and friend over the Parsonage , extremely well pleased , probably , to have the opportunity of showing the Parsonage without Charlotte husband ’s help . the Parsonage was rather small , but well built and convenient ; and everything was fitted up and arranged with a neatness and consistency of which Elizabeth gave Charlotte all the credit . When William Collins could be forgotten , there was really an air of great comfort throughout , and by Charlotte ’s evident enjoyment of it , Elizabeth supposed William Collins must be often forgotten . 
 
  Elizabeth had already learnt that Cathleen was still in the country . It was spoken of again while the ladies were at dinner , when William Collins joining in , observed : 
 
  “ Yes , Miss Elizabeth , Elizabeth will have the honour of seeing Cathleen on the ensuing Sunday at church , and I need not say Elizabeth will be delighted with Cathleen . Cathleen is all affability and condescension , and I doubt not but Elizabeth will be honoured with some portion of Cathleen notice when service is over . I have scarcely any hesitation in saying Cathleen will include Elizabeth and I sister Maria in every invitation with which Cathleen honours us during Elizabeth stay here . Cathleen behaviour to I dear Charlotte is charming . We dine at Rosings twice every week , and are never allowed to walk home . Cathleen carriage is regularly ordered for We . I should say , the carriage the carriage , for Cathleen has several . ” 
 
  “ Cathleen is a very respectable , sensible woman indeed , ” added Charlotte , “ and a most attentive neighbour . ” 
 
  “ Very true , I dear , that is exactly what I say . Cathleen is the sort of woman whom one can not regard with too much deference . ” 
 
  The evening was spent chiefly in talking over Hertfordshire news , and telling again what had already been written ; and when The evening closed , Elizabeth , in the solitude of Elizabeth chamber , had to meditate upon Charlotte ’s degree of contentment , to understand Charlotte address in guiding , and composure in bearing with , Charlotte husband , and to acknowledge that it was all done very well . Elizabeth had also to anticipate how Elizabeth visit would pass , the quiet tenor of their usual employments , the vexatious interruptions of William Collins , and the gaieties of their intercourse with Rosings . A lively imagination soon settled it all . 
 
  About the middle of the next day , as Elizabeth was in Elizabeth room getting ready for a walk , a sudden noise below seemed to speak the whole house in confusion ; and , after listening a moment , Elizabeth heard somebody running up stairs in a violent hurry , and calling loudly after somebody . Elizabeth opened the door and met Maria in the landing place , who , breathless with agitation , cried out — 
 
  “ Oh , my dear Elizabeth ! pray make haste and come into the dining - room , for there is such a sight to be seen ! I sister Maria will not tell Elizabeth what such a sight to be seen is . Make haste , and come down this moment . ” 
 
  Elizabeth asked questions in vain ; I sister Maria would tell Elizabeth nothing more , and down the ladies ran into the dining - room , which fronted the lane to Hunsford , in quest of such a sight to be seen ; It was two ladies stopping in a low phaeton at the small gate which led by a short gravel walk to the Parsonage . 
 
  “ And is this all ? ” cried Elizabeth . “ Elizabeth expected at least that the pigs were got into the garden , which was large and well laid out , and to the cultivation of which William Collins attended William Collins , and here is nothing but Cathleen and Cathleen daughter . ” 
 
  “ La ! Elizabeth , ” said I sister Maria , quite shocked at the mistake , “ it is not Cathleen . The old lady is Mrs. Jenkinson , who lives with them ; the other is Cathleen . Only look at Cathleen . Cathleen is quite a little creature . Who would have thought that Cathleen could be so thin and small ? ” 
 
  “ Cathleen is abominably rude to keep Charlotte out of doors in all this wind . Why does Cathleen not come in ? ” 
 
  “ Oh , Charlotte says Cathleen hardly ever does . It is the greatest of favours when Cathleen comes in . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth like Cathleen appearance , ” said Elizabeth , struck with other ideas . “ Cathleen looks sickly and cross . Yes , Cathleen will do for him very well . Cathleen will make him a very proper wife . ” William Collins William Collins and Charlotte were both standing at the small gate which led by a short gravel walk to the Parsonage in conversation with the ladies ; and William Collins , to Elizabeth ’s high diversion , was stationed in the doorway , in earnest contemplation of the greatness before William Collins , and constantly bowing whenever Cathleen looked that way . 
 
  At length there was nothing more to be said ; the ladies drove on , and the others returned into the Parsonage . William Collins no sooner saw the ladies than William Collins began to congratulate the ladies on the ladies good fortune , which Charlotte explained by letting the ladies know that the whole party was asked to dine at Rosings the next day . 
 Chapter 
 
  William Collins ’s triumph , in consequence of this invitation , was complete . The power of displaying the grandeur of William Collins ’s patroness to William Collins ’s wondering visitors , and of letting William Collins ’s wondering visitors see William Collins ’s patroness civility towards William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife , was exactly what William Collins ’s had wished for ; and that an opportunity of doing it should be given so soon , was such an instance of William Collins ’s patroness condescension , as William Collins ’s knew not how to admire enough . 
 
  “ William Collins ’s confess , ” said William Collins ’s , “ that William Collins ’s should not have been at all surprised by William Collins ’s patroness asking William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife on Sunday to drink tea and spend the evening at Rosings . William Collins ’s rather expected , from William Collins ’s knowledge of William Collins ’s patroness affability , that it would happen . But who could have foreseen such an attention as this ? Who could have imagined that William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife should receive an invitation to dine there ( an invitation , moreover , including the whole party ) so immediately after your arrival ! ” 
 
  “ William Collins ’s am the less surprised at what has happened , ” replied William Collins ’s , “ from that knowledge of what the manners of the great really are , which William Collins ’s situation in life has allowed William Collins ’s to acquire . About the court , such instances of elegant breeding are not uncommon . ” 
 
  Scarcely anything was talked of the whole day or next morning but William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife visit to Rosings . William Collins ’s was carefully instructing William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife in what William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife were to expect , that the sight of such rooms , so many servants , and so splendid a dinner , might not wholly overpower William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife . 
 
  When William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife were separating for the toilette , William Collins ’s said to Elizabeth — 
 
  “ Do not make Elizabeth uneasy , William Collins ’s dear cousin , about Elizabeth apparel . William Collins ’s patroness is far from requiring that elegance of dress in us which becomes William Collins ’s patroness and William Collins ’s patroness daughter . William Collins ’s would advise Elizabeth merely to put on whatever of Elizabeth clothes is superior to the rest — there is no occasion for anything more . William Collins ’s patroness will not think the worse of Elizabeth for being simply dressed . William Collins ’s patroness likes to have the distinction of rank preserved . ” 
 
  While William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife were dressing , William Collins ’s came two or three times to William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife different doors , to recommend William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife being quick , as William Collins ’s patroness very much objected to be kept waiting for William Collins ’s patroness dinner . Such formidable accounts of William Collins ’s patroness , and William Collins ’s patroness manner of living , quite frightened Maria Lucas who had been little used to company , and Maria Lucas who had been little used to company looked forward to Maria Lucas who had been little used to company introduction at Rosings with as much apprehension as William Collins ’s had done to William Collins ’s presentation at St. James ’s . 
 
  As the weather was fine , William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife had a pleasant walk of about half a mile across the park . Every park has Every park beauty and Every park prospects ; and Elizabeth saw much to be pleased with , though Elizabeth could not be in such raptures as William Collins ’s expected the scene to inspire , and was but slightly affected by William Collins ’s enumeration of the windows in front of the house , and William Collins ’s relation of what the glazing altogether had originally cost Sir Lewis de Bourgh . 
 
  When William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife ascended the steps to the hall , Maria ’s alarm was every moment increasing , and William Collins ’s did not look perfectly calm . Elizabeth ’s courage did not fail Elizabeth . Elizabeth had heard nothing of William Collins ’s patroness that spoke Elizabeth awful from any extraordinary talents or miraculous virtue , and the mere stateliness of money or rank Elizabeth thought Elizabeth could witness without trepidation . 
 
  From the hall , William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife followed the servants through an ante - chamber , to the room where William Collins ’s patroness , William Collins ’s patroness daughter , and Mrs. Jenkinson were sitting . William Collins ’s patroness , with great condescension , arose to receive William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife ; and as William Collins ’s had settled it with William Collins ’s that the office of introduction should be Elizabeth , the office of introduction was performed in a proper manner , without any of those apologies and thanks which William Collins ’s would have thought necessary . 
 
  In spite of having been at St. James ’s , William Collins ’s was so completely awed by the grandeur surrounding William Collins ’s , that William Collins ’s had but just courage enough to make a very low bow , and take William Collins ’s seat without saying a word ; and William Collins ’s patroness daughter , frightened almost out of William Collins ’s patroness daughter senses , sat on the edge of William Collins ’s patroness daughter chair , not knowing which way to look . Elizabeth found Elizabeth quite equal to the scene , and could observe William Collins ’s patroness , William Collins ’s patroness daughter , and Mrs. Jenkinson composedly . William Collins ’s patroness was a tall , large woman , with strongly - marked features , which might once have been handsome . William Collins ’s patroness air was not conciliating , nor was William Collins ’s patroness manner of receiving William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife such as to make William Collins ’s patroness visitors forget William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife inferior rank . William Collins ’s patroness was not rendered formidable by silence ; but whatever William Collins ’s patroness said was spoken in so authoritative a tone , as marked William Collins ’s patroness self - importance , and brought William Collins ’s patroness daughter immediately to Elizabeth ’s mind ; and from the observation of the day altogether , Elizabeth believed William Collins ’s patroness to be exactly what William Collins ’s represented . 
 
  When , after examining the mother , in whose countenance and deportment Elizabeth soon found some resemblance of Fitzwilliam , Elizabeth turned Elizabeth eyes on Elizabeth , Elizabeth could almost have joined in Maria ’s astonishment at Elizabeth being so thin and so small . There was neither in figure nor face any likeness between William Collins ’s patroness , William Collins ’s patroness daughter , and Mrs. Jenkinson . William Collins ’s patroness was pale and sickly ; William Collins ’s patroness features , though not plain , were insignificant ; and William Collins ’s patroness spoke very little , except in a low voice , to Mrs. Jenkinson , in whose appearance there was nothing remarkable , and who was entirely engaged in listening to what William Collins ’s patroness said , and placing a screen in the proper direction before William Collins ’s patroness eyes . 
 
  After sitting a few minutes , William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife were all sent to one of the windows to admire the view , William Collins ’s attending William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife to point out the view beauties , and William Collins ’s patroness kindly informing William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife that the view was much better worth looking at in the summer . 
 
  The dinner was exceedingly handsome , and there were all the servants and all the articles of plate which William Collins ’s had promised ; and , as William Collins ’s had likewise foretold , William Collins ’s took William Collins ’s seat at the bottom of the table , by William Collins ’s patroness desire , and looked as if William Collins ’s felt that life could furnish nothing greater . William Collins ’s carved , and ate , and praised with delighted alacrity ; and every dish was commended , first by William Collins ’s and then by Sir William , who was now enough recovered to echo whatever William Collins ’s said , in a manner which Elizabeth wondered William Collins ’s patroness could bear . But William Collins ’s patroness seemed gratified by their excessive admiration , and gave most gracious smiles , especially when any dish on the table proved a novelty to their . William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife did not supply much conversation . Elizabeth was ready to speak whenever there was an opening , but Elizabeth was seated between Charlotte and William Collins ’s patroness — the former of whom was engaged in listening to William Collins ’s patroness , and the latter said not a word to Elizabeth all dinner - time . Mrs. Jenkinson was chiefly employed in watching how little William Collins ’s patroness ate , pressing William Collins ’s patroness to try some other dish , and fearing William Collins ’s patroness was indisposed . Maria ’s thought speaking out of the question , and the gentlemen did nothing but eat and admire . 
 
  When William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife returned to the drawing - room , there was little to be done but to hear William Collins ’s patroness talk , which William Collins ’s patroness did without any intermission till coffee came in , delivering William Collins ’s patroness opinion on every subject in so decisive a manner , as proved that William Collins ’s patroness was not used to have William Collins ’s patroness judgement controverted . William Collins ’s patroness enquired into Charlotte ’s domestic concerns familiarly and minutely , gave Charlotte a great deal of advice as to the management of Charlotte ’s domestic concerns ; told Charlotte how everything ought to be regulated in so small a family as Charlotte , and instructed Charlotte as to the care of Charlotte cows and Charlotte poultry . Elizabeth found that nothing was beneath William Collins ’s patroness attention , which could furnish William Collins ’s patroness with an occasion of dictating to others . In the intervals of William Collins ’s patroness discourse with William Collins ’s , William Collins ’s patroness addressed a variety of questions to Maria ’s and Elizabeth , but especially to Elizabeth . William Collins ’s patroness asked Elizabeth , at different times , how many sisters Elizabeth had , whether they were older or younger than Elizabeth , whether any of they were likely to be married , whether they were handsome , where they had been educated , what carriage Elizabeth father kept , and what had been Elizabeth mother ’s maiden name ? Elizabeth felt all the impertinence of William Collins ’s patroness questions but answered William Collins ’s patroness questions very composedly . William Collins ’s patroness then observed , 
 
  “ Elizabeth father ’s estate is entailed on William Collins ’s , William Collins ’s patroness think . For Charlotte sake , ” turning to Charlotte , “ William Collins ’s patroness am glad of is ; but otherwise William Collins ’s patroness see no occasion for entailing estates from the female line . entailing was not thought necessary in Sir Lewis de Bourgh ’s family . Do Charlotte play and sing , Charlotte ? ” 
 
  “ A little . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! then — some time or other we shall be happy to hear Charlotte . we instrument is a capital one , probably superior to —— Charlotte shall try we instrument some day . Do Charlotte sisters play and sing ? ” 
 
  “ One of Charlotte sisters does . ” 
 
  “ Why did not William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife learn ? William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife ought all to have learned . The Miss Webbs all play , and William Collins ’s has not so good an income as William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife . Do Charlotte draw ? ” 
 
  “ No , not at all . ” 
 
  “ What , none of William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife ? ” 
 
  “ Not one . ” 
 
  “ That is very strange . But William Collins ’s patroness suppose Charlotte had no opportunity . Elizabeth mother ’s should have taken Charlotte to town every spring for the benefit of masters . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth mother ’s would have had no objection , but Charlotte father hates London . ” 
 
  “ Has Charlotte governess left Charlotte ? ” 
 
  “ William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife never had any governess . ” 
 
  “ No governess ! How was that possible ? William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife brought up at home without a governess ! William Collins ’s patroness never heard of such a thing . Charlotte mother must have been quite a slave to Charlotte education . ” 
 
  Elizabeth could hardly help smiling as Elizabeth assured William Collins ’s patroness been had not been the case . 
 
  “ Then , who taught Charlotte ? who attended to Charlotte ? Without a governess , Charlotte must have been neglected . ” 
 
  “ Compared with some families , Elizabeth believe William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife were ; but such of William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife as wished to learn never wanted the means . William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife were always encouraged to read , and had all the masters that were necessary . Those who chose to be idle , certainly might . ” 
 
  “ Aye , no doubt ; but that is what a governess will prevent , and if William Collins ’s patroness had known Charlotte mother , William Collins ’s patroness should have advised Elizabeth mother ’s most strenuously to engage one . William Collins ’s patroness always say that nothing is to be done in education without steady and regular instruction , and nobody but a governess can give education . It is wonderful how many families William Collins ’s patroness have been the means of supplying in that way . William Collins ’s patroness am always glad to get a young person well placed out . Four nieces of Mrs. Jenkinson are most delightfully situated through William Collins ’s patroness means ; and it was but the other day that William Collins ’s patroness recommended another young person , who was merely accidentally mentioned to William Collins ’s patroness , and the family are quite delighted with another young person , who was merely accidentally mentioned to William Collins ’s patroness . William Collins ’s , did William Collins ’s patroness tell William Collins ’s of Lady Metcalf ’s calling yesterday to thank William Collins ’s patroness ? Lady Metcalf ’s finds Miss Pope a treasure . ‘ William Collins ’s patroness , ’ said Lady Metcalf ’s , ‘ William Collins ’s patroness have given Lady Metcalf ’s a treasure . ’ Are any of Charlotte younger sisters out , Charlotte ? ” 
 
  “ Yes , William Collins ’s patroness , all . ” 
 
  “ All ! What , All ! out at once ? Very odd ! And Charlotte only the second . Charlotte younger sisters out before the elder ones are married ! Charlotte younger sisters must be very young ? ” 
 
  “ Yes , Charlotte youngest is not sixteen . Perhaps Charlotte youngest is full young to be much in company . But really , William Collins ’s patroness , Charlotte think it would be very hard upon younger sisters , that younger sisters should not have younger sisters share of society and amusement , because the elder may not have the means or inclination to marry early . The last - born has as good a right to the pleasures of youth as the first . And to be kept back on such a motive ! Charlotte think such a motive would not be very likely to promote sisterly affection or delicacy of mind . ” 
 
  “ Upon William Collins ’s patroness word , ” said William Collins ’s patroness , “ Elizabeth give Elizabeth opinion very decidedly for so young a person . Pray , what is Elizabeth age ? ” 
 
  “ With three younger sisters grown up , ” replied Elizabeth , smiling , “ William Collins ’s patroness can hardly expect Elizabeth to own it . ” 
 
  William Collins ’s patroness seemed quite astonished at not receiving a direct answer ; and Elizabeth suspected Elizabeth to be the first creature who had ever dared to trifle with so much dignified impertinence . 
 
  “ Elizabeth can not be more than twenty , William Collins ’s patroness am sure , therefore Elizabeth need not conceal Elizabeth age . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth am not one - and - twenty . ” 
 
  When the gentlemen had joined them , and tea was over , the card - tables were placed . William Collins ’s patroness , William Collins ’s , and Mr. and Mrs. Collins sat down to quadrille ; and as William Collins ’s patroness chose to play at cassino , William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife had the honour of assisting Mrs. Jenkinson to make up Mrs. Jenkinson party . William Collins ’s patroness , William Collins ’s , and Mr. and Mrs. Collins table was superlatively stupid . Scarcely a syllable was uttered that did not relate to quadrille , except when Mrs. Jenkinson expressed Mrs. Jenkinson fears of William Collins ’s patroness being too hot or too cold , or having too much or too little light . A great deal more passed at the other table . William Collins ’s patroness was generally speaking — stating the mistakes of William Collins ’s patroness , William Collins ’s patroness daughter , and Mrs. Jenkinson , or relating some anecdote of William Collins ’s patroness . William Collins ’s was employed in agreeing to everything William Collins ’s patroness said , thanking William Collins ’s patroness for every fish William Collins ’s won , and apologising if William Collins ’s thought William Collins ’s won too many . William Collins ’s did not say much . William Collins ’s was storing William Collins ’s memory with anecdotes and noble names . 
 
  When William Collins ’s patroness and Elizabeth had played as long as William Collins ’s patroness and Elizabeth chose , the tables were broken up , the carriage was offered to William Collins ’s , gratefully accepted and immediately ordered . William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife then gathered round the fire to hear William Collins ’s patroness determine what weather William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife were to have on the morrow . From these instructions William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife were summoned by the arrival of the carriage ; and with many speeches of thankfulness on William Collins ’s side and as many bows on William Collins ’s William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife departed . As soon as William Collins ’s and William Collins ’s wife had driven from the door , Elizabeth was called on by Elizabeth cousin to give Elizabeth opinion of all that Elizabeth had seen at Rosings , which , for Charlotte ’s sake , Elizabeth made more favourable than Elizabeth opinion of all that Elizabeth had seen at Rosings , which , for Charlotte ’s sake , Elizabeth made more favourable than really was . But Elizabeth commendation , though costing Elizabeth some trouble , could by no means satisfy William Collins ’s , and William Collins ’s was very soon obliged to take Elizabeth praise into William Collins ’s own hands . 
 Chapter 
 
  Sir William stayed only a week at Hunsford , but Sir William visit was long enough to convince Sir William of Sir William daughter ’s being most comfortably settled , and of Sir William daughter ’s possessing such a husband and such a neighbour as were not often met with . While Sir William was with the whole family , Sir William devoted Sir William morning to driving Sir William out in Sir William gig , and showing Sir William the country ; but when Sir William went away , the whole family returned to the whole family usual employments , and Elizabeth was thankful to find that the whole family did not see more of Sir William by the alteration , for the chief of the time between breakfast and dinner was now passed by Sir William either at work in the garden or in reading and writing , and looking out of the window in Sir William own book - room , which fronted the road . The room in which the whole family sat was backwards . Elizabeth had at first rather wondered that Charlotte should not prefer the dining - parlour for common use ; the dining - parlour was a better sized room , and had a more pleasant aspect ; but Elizabeth soon saw that Charlotte had an excellent reason for what Charlotte did , for Sir William would undoubtedly have been much less in Sir William own apartment , had they sat in one equally lively ; and Elizabeth gave Charlotte credit for the arrangement . 
 
  From the drawing - room the whole family could distinguish nothing in the lane , and were indebted to Sir William for the knowledge of what carriages went along , and how often especially Cathleen drove by in especially Cathleen phaeton , which Sir William never failed coming to inform the whole family of , though it happened almost every day . especially Cathleen not unfrequently stopped at the Parsonage , and had a few minutes ’ conversation with Charlotte , but was scarcely ever prevailed upon to get out . 
 
  Very few days passed in which Sir William did not walk to Rosings , and not many in which Sir William wife did not think it necessary to go likewise ; and till Elizabeth recollected that there might be other family livings to be disposed of , Elizabeth could not understand the sacrifice of so many hours . Now and then the whole family were honoured with a call from her ladyship , and nothing escaped her ladyship observation that was passing in the room during these visits . her ladyship examined into the whole family employments , looked at the whole family work , and advised the whole family to do the whole family work differently ; found fault with the arrangement of the furniture ; or detected the housemaid in negligence ; and if her ladyship accepted any refreshment , seemed to do it only for the sake of finding out that Sir William joints of meat were too large for Sir William family . Elizabeth Elizabeth soon perceived , that though her ladyship was not in the commission of the peace of the county , her ladyship was a most active magistrate in her ladyship own parish , the minutest concerns of which were carried to her ladyship by Sir William ; and whenever any of the cottagers were disposed to be quarrelsome , discontented , or too poor , her ladyship sallied forth into the village to settle any of the cottagers differences , silence any of the cottagers complaints , and scold any of the cottagers into harmony and plenty . 
 
  The entertainment of dining at Rosings was repeated about twice a week ; and , allowing for the loss of Sir William , and there being only one card - table in the evening , every such entertainment was the counterpart of the first . the whole family other engagements were few , as the style of living in the neighbourhood in general was beyond Sir William reach . This , however , was no evil to Elizabeth , and upon the whole Elizabeth spent Elizabeth time comfortably enough ; there were half - hours of pleasant conversation with Charlotte , and the weather was so fine for the time of year that Elizabeth had often great enjoyment out of doors . Elizabeth favourite walk , and where Elizabeth frequently went while the others were calling on especially Cathleen , was along the open grove which edged that side of the park , where there was a nice sheltered path , which no one seemed to value but Elizabeth , and where Elizabeth felt beyond the reach of especially Cathleen curiosity . 
 
  In this quiet way , the first fortnight of Elizabeth visit soon passed away . Easter was approaching , and the week preceding Easter was to bring an addition to the family at Rosings , which in so small a circle must be important . Elizabeth had heard soon after Elizabeth arrival that Fitzwilliam was expected there in the course of a few weeks , and though there were not many of Elizabeth acquaintances whom Elizabeth did not prefer , Fitzwilliam coming would furnish one comparatively new to look at in their Rosings parties , and Elizabeth might be amused in seeing how hopeless Caroline ’s designs on Fitzwilliam were , by Fitzwilliam behaviour to Fitzwilliam cousin , for whom Fitzwilliam was evidently destined by Cathleen , who talked of Fitzwilliam coming with the greatest satisfaction , spoke of Fitzwilliam in terms of the highest admiration , and seemed almost angry to find that Fitzwilliam had already been frequently seen by Miss Lucas and Miss Lucas . 
 
  Fitzwilliam coming was soon known at the Parsonage ; for Sir William was walking the whole morning within view of the lodges opening into the lane , in order to have the earliest assurance of Fitzwilliam coming , and after making Sir William bow as the carriage turned into the Park , hurried home with the great intelligence . On the following morning Sir William hastened to Rosings to pay Sir William respects . There were two nephews of especially Cathleen to require two nephews of especially Cathleen , for Fitzwilliam had brought with Fitzwilliam a Fitzwilam , the younger son of Fitzwilliam uncle Lord — — , and , to the great surprise of all the party , when Sir William returned , the gentlemen accompanied Sir William . Charlotte had seen the three gentlemen from Charlotte husband ’s room , crossing the road , and immediately running into the other , told the whole family what an honour the whole family might expect , adding : 
 
  “ Charlotte may thank Elizabeth , Elizabeth , for this piece of civility . Fitzwilliam would never have come so soon to wait upon Charlotte . ” Elizabeth Elizabeth had scarcely time to disclaim all right to the compliment , before the three gentlemen approach was announced by the door - bell , and shortly afterwards the three gentlemen entered the room . a Fitzwilam , the younger son of Fitzwilliam uncle Lord , was about thirty , not handsome , but in person and address most truly the gentleman . Fitzwilliam looked just as Fitzwilliam had been used to look in Hertfordshire — paid Fitzwilliam compliments , with Fitzwilliam usual reserve , to Elizabeth , and whatever might be Fitzwilliam feelings toward Elizabeth friend , met Elizabeth with every appearance of composure . Elizabeth merely curtseyed to Fitzwilliam without saying a word . 
 
  Fitzwilliam entered into conversation directly with the readiness and ease of a well - bred man , and talked very pleasantly ; but Fitzwilliam cousin , after having addressed a slight observation on the house and garden to Elizabeth , sat for some time without speaking to anybody . At length , however , Fitzwilliam civility was so far awakened as to enquire of Elizabeth after the health of Elizabeth family . Elizabeth answered Fitzwilliam in the usual way , and after a moment ’s pause , added : 
 
  “ Elizabeth eldest sister has been in town these three months . Have Fitzwilliam never happened to see Elizabeth eldest sister there ? ” 
 
  Elizabeth was perfectly sensible that Fitzwilliam never had ; but Elizabeth wished to see whether Fitzwilliam would betray any consciousness of what had passed between the Bingleys and Jane , and Elizabeth thought Fitzwilliam looked a little confused as Fitzwilliam answered that Fitzwilliam had never been so fortunate as to meet Elizabeth eldest sister . The subject was pursued no farther , and the gentlemen soon afterwards went away . 
 Chapter 
 
  Fitzwilam ’s manners were very much admired at the Parsonage , and the ladies all felt that Fitzwilam ’s must add considerably to the pleasures of the ladies all engagements at Rosings . It was some days , however , before the ladies all received any invitation thither — for while there were visitors in the Parsonage , visitors could not be necessary ; and it was not till Easter - day , almost a week after the gentlemen ’s arrival , that the ladies all were honoured by such an attention , and then the ladies all were merely asked on leaving church to come there in the evening . For the last week the ladies all had seen very little of Cathleen or Cathleen daughter . Fitzwilam ’s had called at the Parsonage more than once during the last week , but Fitzwilliam the ladies all had seen only at church . 
 
  asked was accepted of course , and at a proper hour the ladies all joined the party in Cathleen ’s drawing - room . Cathleen received the ladies all civilly , but it was plain that the ladies all company was by no means so acceptable as when Cathleen could get nobody else ; and Cathleen was , in fact , almost engrossed by Cathleen nephews , speaking to Cathleen nephews , especially to Fitzwilliam , much more than to any other person in the room . 
 
  Fitzwilam ’s seemed really glad to see the ladies all ; anything was a welcome relief to Fitzwilam ’s at Rosings ; and Cathleen daughter had moreover caught Fitzwilam ’s fancy very much . Fitzwilliam now seated Fitzwilliam by Cathleen daughter , and talked so agreeably of Kent and Hertfordshire , of travelling and staying at home , of new books and music , that Cathleen daughter had never been half so well entertained in Cathleen ’s drawing - room before ; and they conversed with so much spirit and flow , as to draw the attention of Cathleen herself , as well as of Fitzwilliam . Fitzwilliam eyes had been soon and repeatedly turned towards the ladies all with a look of curiosity ; and that Cathleen , after a while , shared the feeling , was more openly acknowledged , for Cathleen did not scruple to call out : 
 
  “ What is that Fitzwilliam are saying , Fitzwilliam ? What is it Fitzwilliam are talking of ? What are Fitzwilliam telling Cathleen daughter ? Let Cathleen hear what it is . ” 
 
  “ they are speaking of music , Cathleen , ” said Fitzwilliam , when no longer able to avoid a reply . 
 
  “ Of music ! Then pray speak aloud . It is of all subjects Cathleen delight . Cathleen must have Cathleen share in the conversation if Fitzwilliam are speaking of music . There are few people in England , Cathleen suppose , who have more true enjoyment of music than Cathleen , or a better natural taste . If Cathleen had ever learnt , Cathleen should have been a great proficient . And so would Anne , if Anne health had allowed Anne to apply . Cathleen am confident that Anne would have performed delightfully . How does Georgiana get on , Fitzwilliam ? ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam spoke with affectionate praise of Anne proficiency . 
 
  “ Cathleen am very glad to hear such a good account of Anne , ” said Cathleen ; “ and pray tell Anne from Cathleen , that Anne can not expect to excel if Anne does not practice a good deal . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam assure Cathleen , Cathleen , ” Fitzwilliam replied , “ that Anne does not need such advice . Anne practises very constantly . ” 
 
  “ So much the better . practises can not be done too much ; and when Fitzwilliam next write to Anne , Fitzwilliam shall charge Anne not to neglect practises on any account . Fitzwilliam often tell young ladies that no excellence in music is to be acquired without constant practice . Fitzwilliam have told Cathleen daughter several times , that Cathleen daughter will never play really well unless Cathleen daughter practises more ; and though Cathleen daughter has no instrument , Cathleen daughter is very welcome , as Fitzwilliam have often told Cathleen daughter , to come to Rosings every day , and play on the pianoforte in Mrs. Jenkinson ’s room . Cathleen daughter would be in nobody ’s way , you know , in that part of the Parsonage . ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam looked a little ashamed of Fitzwilliam aunt ’s ill - breeding , and made no answer . 
 
  When coffee was over , Fitzwilam ’s reminded Cathleen daughter of having promised to play to Fitzwilam ’s ; and Cathleen daughter sat down directly to the instrument . Fitzwilam ’s drew a chair near Cathleen daughter . Cathleen listened to half a song , and then talked , as before , to Fitzwilliam ; till Fitzwilliam walked away from Cathleen , and making with Fitzwilliam usual deliberation towards the pianoforte stationed Fitzwilliam so as to command a full view of Cathleen daughter countenance . Cathleen daughter saw what Fitzwilliam was doing , and at the first convenient pause , turned to Fitzwilliam with an arch smile , and said : 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam mean to frighten Cathleen daughter , Fitzwilliam , by coming in all this state to hear Cathleen daughter ? Cathleen daughter will not be alarmed though Cathleen daughter does play so well . There is a stubbornness about Cathleen daughter that never can bear to be frightened at the will of others . Cathleen daughter courage always rises at every attempt to intimidate Cathleen daughter . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam shall not say Cathleen daughter are mistaken , ” Fitzwilliam replied , “ because Cathleen daughter could not really believe Fitzwilliam to entertain any design of alarming Cathleen daughter ; and Fitzwilliam have had the pleasure of Cathleen daughter acquaintance long enough to know that Cathleen daughter find great enjoyment in occasionally professing opinions which in fact are not Cathleen daughter own . ” 
 
  Cathleen daughter laughed heartily at this picture of Cathleen daughter , and said to Fitzwilliam , “ Fitzwilliam cousin will give Fitzwilliam a very pretty notion of Cathleen daughter , and teach Fitzwilliam not to believe a word Cathleen daughter say . Cathleen daughter am particularly unlucky in meeting with a person so able to expose Cathleen daughter real character , in a part of the world where Cathleen daughter had hoped to pass Cathleen daughter off with some degree of credit . Indeed , Fitzwilliam , it is very ungenerous in Fitzwilliam to mention all that Fitzwilliam knew to Cathleen daughter disadvantage in Hertfordshire — and , give Cathleen daughter leave to say , very impolitic too — for mention is provoking Cathleen daughter to retaliate , and such things may come out as will shock Fitzwilliam relations to hear . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam am not afraid of Cathleen daughter , ” said Fitzwilliam , smilingly . 
 
  “ Pray let Fitzwilliam hear what Fitzwilliam have to accuse Fitzwilliam of , ” cried Fitzwilliam . “ Fitzwilliam should like to know how Fitzwilliam behaves among strangers . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam shall hear then — but prepare Fitzwilliam for something very dreadful . The first time of Fitzwilliam ever seeing Fitzwilliam in Hertfordshire , Fitzwilliam must know , was at a ball — and at a ball , what do Fitzwilliam think Fitzwilliam did ? Fitzwilliam danced only four dances , though gentlemen were scarce ; and , to Fitzwilliam certain knowledge , more than one young lady was sitting down in want of a partner . Fitzwilliam , Fitzwilliam can not deny the fact . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam had not at that time the honour of knowing any lady in the assembly beyond Fitzwilliam own party . ” 
 
  “ True ; and nobody can ever be introduced in a ball - room . Well , Fitzwilliam , what do Cathleen daughter play next ? Cathleen daughter fingers wait Fitzwilliam orders . ” 
 
  “ Perhaps , ” said Fitzwilliam , “ Fitzwilliam should have judged better , had Fitzwilliam sought an introduction ; but Fitzwilliam am ill - qualified to recommend Fitzwilliam to strangers . ” 
 
  “ Shall we ask Fitzwilliam cousin the reason of am ? ” said Cathleen daughter , still addressing Fitzwilliam . “ Shall we ask Fitzwilliam why a man of sense and education , and who has lived in the world , is ill qualified to recommend Fitzwilliam to strangers ? ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam can answer Cathleen daughter question , ” said Fitzwilliam , “ without applying to Fitzwilliam . It is because Fitzwilliam will not give Fitzwilliam the trouble . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam certainly have not the talent which some people possess , ” said Fitzwilliam , “ of conversing easily with those Fitzwilliam have never seen before . Fitzwilliam can not catch those Fitzwilliam have never seen before tone of conversation , or appear interested in those Fitzwilliam have never seen before concerns , as Fitzwilliam often see done . ” 
 
  “ Cathleen daughter fingers , ” said Cathleen daughter , “ do not move over the instrument in the masterly manner which Cathleen daughter see so many women ’s do . Cathleen daughter fingers have not the same force or rapidity , and do not produce the same expression . But then Cathleen daughter have always supposed it to be Cathleen daughter own fault — because Cathleen daughter will not take the trouble of practising . It is not that Cathleen daughter do not believe Cathleen daughter fingers as capable as any other woman ’s of superior execution . ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam smiled and said , “ Cathleen daughter are perfectly right . Cathleen daughter have employed Cathleen daughter time much better . No one admitted to the privilege of hearing Cathleen daughter can think anything wanting . We neither of We perform to strangers . ” 
 
  Here We were interrupted by Cathleen , who called out to know what We were talking of . Cathleen daughter immediately began playing again . Cathleen , who called out to know what We were talking of approached , and , after listening for a few minutes , said to Fitzwilliam : 
 
  “ Cathleen daughter would not play at all amiss if Cathleen daughter practised more , and could have the advantage of a London master . Cathleen daughter has a very good notion of fingering , though Cathleen daughter taste is not equal to Anne ’s . Anne would have been a delightful performer , had Anne health allowed Anne to learn . ” 
 
  Cathleen daughter looked at Fitzwilliam to see how cordially Fitzwilliam assented to Cathleen , who called out to know what We were talking of praise ; but neither at that moment nor at any other could Cathleen daughter discern any symptom of love ; and from the whole of Fitzwilliam behaviour to Cathleen , who called out to know what We were talking of Cathleen daughter derived this comfort for Caroline , that Fitzwilliam might have been just as likely to marry Caroline , had Cathleen , who called out to know what We were talking of been Fitzwilliam relation . 
 
  Cathleen , who called out to know what We were talking of continued Cathleen , who called out to know what We were talking of remarks on Cathleen daughter performance , mixing with Cathleen , who called out to know what We were talking of remarks on Cathleen daughter performance many instructions on execution and taste . Cathleen daughter received Cathleen , who called out to know what We were talking of remarks on Cathleen daughter performance with all the forbearance of civility , and , at the request of the gentlemen ’s , remained at the instrument till Cathleen ladyship ’s carriage was ready to take the ladies all home . 
 Chapter 
 
  Elizabeth was sitting by Elizabeth the next morning , and writing to Jane while Mrs. Collins and Maria were gone on business into the village , when Elizabeth was startled by a ring at the door , the certain signal of a visitor . As Elizabeth had heard no carriage , Elizabeth thought a visitor not unlikely to be Cathleen , and under that apprehension was putting away Elizabeth half - finished letter that Elizabeth might escape all impertinent questions , when the door opened , and , to Elizabeth very great surprise , Fitzwilliam , and Fitzwilliam only , entered the room . 
 
  Fitzwilliam seemed astonished too on finding Elizabeth alone , and apologised for Fitzwilliam intrusion by letting Elizabeth know that Fitzwilliam had understood all the ladies were to be within . 
 
  They then sat down , and when Elizabeth enquiries after Rosings were made , seemed in danger of sinking into total silence . It was absolutely necessary , therefore , to think of something , and in this emergence recollecting when Elizabeth had seen Fitzwilliam last in Hertfordshire , and feeling curious to know what Fitzwilliam would say on the subject of their hasty departure , Elizabeth observed : 
 
  “ How very suddenly their quitted Netherfield last November , Fitzwilliam ! It must have been a most agreeable surprise to Charles to see their after Charles so soon ; for , if Elizabeth recollect right , Charles went but the day before . Charles and Charles sisters were well , Elizabeth hope , when Fitzwilliam left London ? ” 
 
  “ Perfectly so , Fitzwilliam thank Elizabeth . ” 
 
  Elizabeth found that Elizabeth was to receive no other answer , and , after a short pause added : 
 
  “ Elizabeth think Elizabeth have understood that Charles has not much idea of ever returning to Netherfield again ? ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam have never heard Charles say so ; but it is probable that Charles may spend very little of Charles time there in the future . Charles has many friends , and is at a time of life when friends and engagements are continually increasing . ” 
 
  “ If Charles means to be but little at Netherfield , it would be better for the neighbourhood that Charles should give up the place entirely , for then we might possibly get a settled family there . But , perhaps , Charles did not take the place so much for the convenience of the neighbourhood as for Charles own , and we must expect Charles to keep the place or quit the place on the same principle . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam should not be surprised , ” said Fitzwilliam , “ if Charles were to give the place up as soon as any eligible purchase offers . ” 
 
  Elizabeth made no answer . Elizabeth was afraid of talking longer of Fitzwilliam friend ; and , having nothing else to say , was now determined to leave the trouble of finding a subject to Fitzwilliam . 
 
  Fitzwilliam took the hint , and soon began with , “ the place seems a very comfortable house . Cathleen , Elizabeth believe , did a great deal to the place when Charles first came to Hunsford . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth believe Cathleen did — and Elizabeth am sure Cathleen could not have bestowed Cathleen kindness on a more grateful object . ” 
 
  “ Charles appears to be very fortunate in Charles choice of a wife . ” 
 
  “ Yes , indeed , Charles friends may well rejoice in Charles having met with one of the very few sensible women who would have accepted Charles , or have made Charles happy if they had . Elizabeth friend has an excellent understanding — though Elizabeth am not certain that Elizabeth consider Elizabeth marrying Charles as the wisest thing Elizabeth ever did . Elizabeth seems perfectly happy , however , and in a prudential light it is certainly a very good match for Elizabeth . ” 
 
  “ It must be very agreeable for Elizabeth to be settled within so easy a distance of Elizabeth own family and friends . ” 
 
  “ An easy distance , do Elizabeth call it ? It is nearly fifty miles . ” 
 
  “ And what is fifty miles of good road ? Little more than half a day ’s journey . Yes , Elizabeth call it a very easy distance . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth should never have considered the distance as one of the advantages of the match , ” cried Elizabeth . “ Elizabeth should never have said Elizabeth was settled near Elizabeth family . ” 
 
  “ the distance is a proof of Elizabeth own attachment to Hertfordshire . Anything beyond the very neighbourhood of Longbourn , Fitzwilliam suppose , would appear far . ” 
 
  As Fitzwilliam spoke there was a sort of smile which Elizabeth fancied Elizabeth understood ; Fitzwilliam must be supposing Elizabeth to be thinking of Jane and Netherfield , and Elizabeth blushed as Elizabeth answered : 
 
  “ Elizabeth do not mean to say that a woman may not be settled too near a woman family . The far and the near must be relative , and depend on many varying circumstances . Where there is fortune to make the expenses of travelling unimportant , distance becomes no evil . But that is not the case here . Charles and Charles sisters have a comfortable income , but not such a one as will allow of frequent journeys — and Fitzwilliam am persuaded Elizabeth would not call Elizabeth near Elizabeth family under less than half the present distance . ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam drew Fitzwilliam chair a little towards Elizabeth , and said , “ Elizabeth can not have a right to such very strong local attachment . Elizabeth can not have been always at Longbourn . ” 
 
  Elizabeth looked surprised . Fitzwilliam experienced some change of feeling ; Fitzwilliam drew back Fitzwilliam chair , took a newspaper from the table , and glancing over a newspaper , said , in a colder voice : 
 
  “ Are Elizabeth pleased with Kent ? ” 
 
  A short dialogue on the subject of the country ensued , on either side calm and concise — and soon put an end to by the entrance of Charlotte and Charlotte sister , just returned from Charlotte sister , just returned from walk . The tête - à - tête surprised Charlotte and Charlotte sister , just returned from Charlotte sister , just returned from walk . Fitzwilliam related the mistake which had occasioned Fitzwilliam intruding on Elizabeth , and after sitting a few minutes longer without saying much to anybody , went away . 
 
  “ What can be the meaning of this ? ” said Charlotte , as soon as Fitzwilliam was gone . “ Charlotte dear , Elizabeth , Fitzwilliam must be in love with Elizabeth , or Fitzwilliam would never have called on us in this familiar way . ” 
 
  But when Elizabeth told of Fitzwilliam silence , it did not seem very likely , even to Charlotte ’s wishes , to be the case ; and after various conjectures , Charlotte and Charlotte sister , just returned from Charlotte sister , just returned from walk could at last only suppose Fitzwilliam visit to proceed from the difficulty of finding anything to do , which was the more probable from the time of year . All field sports were over . Within doors there was Cathleen , books , and a billiard - table , but gentlemen can not always be within doors ; and in the nearness of the Parsonage , or the pleasantness of the walk to the Parsonage , or of the people who lived in the Parsonage , Charlotte and Charlotte sister , just returned from Charlotte sister , just returned from walk found a temptation from this period of walking thither almost every day . Charlotte and Charlotte sister , just returned from Charlotte sister , just returned from walk called at various times of the morning , sometimes separately , sometimes together , and now and then accompanied by Charlotte and Charlotte sister , just returned from Charlotte sister , just returned from walk aunt . It was plain to Charlotte and Charlotte sister , just returned from Charlotte sister , just returned from walk that Fitzwilliam came because Fitzwilliam had pleasure in Charlotte and Charlotte sister , just returned from Charlotte sister , just returned from walk society , a persuasion which of course recommended Fitzwilliam still more ; and Elizabeth was reminded by Elizabeth own satisfaction in being with Fitzwilliam , as well as by Fitzwilliam evident admiration of Elizabeth , of Elizabeth former favourite George ; and though , in comparing them , Elizabeth saw there was less captivating softness in Fitzwilliam manners , Elizabeth believed Fitzwilliam might have the best informed mind . 
 
  But why Fitzwilliam came so often to the Parsonage , it was more difficult to understand . came could not be for society , as Fitzwilliam frequently sat there ten minutes together without opening Fitzwilliam lips ; and when Fitzwilliam did speak , speak seemed the effect of necessity rather than of choice — a sacrifice to propriety , not a pleasure to Fitzwilliam . Fitzwilliam seldom appeared really animated . Elizabeth knew not what to make of Fitzwilliam . Fitzwilliam occasionally laughing at Fitzwilliam stupidity , proved that Fitzwilliam was generally different , which Elizabeth own knowledge of Fitzwilliam could not have told Elizabeth ; and as Elizabeth would liked to have believed this change the effect of love , and the object of that love Elizabeth friend Elizabeth , Elizabeth set Elizabeth seriously to work to find it out . Elizabeth watched Fitzwilliam whenever they were at Rosings , and whenever Fitzwilliam came to Hunsford ; but without much success . Fitzwilliam certainly looked at Elizabeth a great deal , but the expression of looked was disputable . looked was an earnest , steadfast gaze , but Elizabeth often doubted whether there were much admiration in looked , and sometimes looked seemed nothing but absence of mind . 
 
  Elizabeth had once or twice suggested to Elizabeth the possibility of Fitzwilliam being partial to Elizabeth , but Elizabeth always laughed at the possibility of Fitzwilliam being partial to Elizabeth ; and Elizabeth did not think it right to press the subject , from the danger of raising expectations which might only end in disappointment ; for in Elizabeth opinion it admitted not of a doubt , that all Elizabeth dislike would vanish , if Elizabeth could suppose Fitzwilliam to be in Elizabeth power . 
 
  In Elizabeth kind schemes for Elizabeth , Elizabeth sometimes planned Elizabeth marrying Fitzwilliam . Fitzwilliam was beyond comparison the most pleasant man ; Fitzwilliam certainly admired Elizabeth , and Fitzwilliam situation in life was most eligible ; but , to counterbalance these advantages , Fitzwilliam had considerable patronage in the church , and Fitzwilliam cousin could have none at all . 
 Chapter 
 
  More than once did Elizabeth , in Elizabeth ramble within the park , unexpectedly meet Fitzwilliam . Elizabeth felt all the perverseness of the mischance that should bring Fitzwilliam where no one else was brought , and , to prevent the mischance that should bring Fitzwilliam where no one else was brought ever happening again , took care to inform Fitzwilliam at first that it was a favourite haunt of Elizabeth . How the mischance that should bring Fitzwilliam where no one else was brought could occur a second time , therefore , was very odd ! Yet the mischance that should bring Fitzwilliam where no one else was brought did , and even a third . It seemed like wilful ill - nature , or a voluntary penance , for on these occasions it was not merely a few formal enquiries and an awkward pause and then away , but Fitzwilliam actually thought it necessary to turn back and walk with Elizabeth . Fitzwilliam never said a great deal , nor did Elizabeth give Elizabeth the trouble of talking or of listening much ; but it struck Elizabeth in the course of their third rencontre that Fitzwilliam was asking some odd unconnected questions — about Elizabeth pleasure in being at Hunsford , Elizabeth love of solitary walks , and Elizabeth opinion of Mr. and Mrs. Collins ’s happiness ; and that in speaking of Rosings and Elizabeth not perfectly understanding the house , Fitzwilliam seemed to expect that whenever Elizabeth came into Kent again Elizabeth would be staying there too . Fitzwilliam words seemed to imply it . Could Fitzwilliam have Fitzwilam in Fitzwilliam thoughts ? Elizabeth supposed , if Fitzwilliam meant anything , Fitzwilliam must mean an allusion to what might arise in that quarter . It distressed Elizabeth a little , and Elizabeth was quite glad to find Elizabeth at the gate in the pales opposite the Parsonage . 
 
  Elizabeth was engaged one day as Elizabeth walked , in perusing Jane ’s last letter , and dwelling on some passages which proved that Jane ’s had not written in spirits , when , instead of being again surprised by Fitzwilliam , Elizabeth saw on looking up that Fitzwilliam was meeting Elizabeth . Putting away Jane ’s last letter immediately and forcing a smile , Elizabeth said : 
 
  “ Elizabeth did not know before that Fitzwilliam ever walked this way . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam have been making the tour of the park , ” Fitzwilliam replied , “ as Fitzwilliam generally do every year , and intend to close the tour of the park with a call at the Parsonage . Are Fitzwilliam going much farther ? ” 
 
  “ No , Fitzwilliam should have turned in a moment . ” 
 
  And accordingly Elizabeth did turn , and they walked towards the Parsonage together . 
 
  “ Do Fitzwilliam certainly leave Kent on Saturday ? ” said Elizabeth . 
 
  “ Yes — if Fitzwilliam does not put it off again . But Fitzwilliam am at Fitzwilliam disposal . Fitzwilliam arranges the business just as Fitzwilliam pleases . ” 
 
  “ And if not able to please Fitzwilliam in the arrangement , Fitzwilliam has at least pleasure in the great power of choice . Elizabeth do not know anybody who seems more to enjoy the power of doing what Fitzwilliam likes than Fitzwilliam . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam likes to have Fitzwilliam own way very well , ” replied Fitzwilliam . “ But so we all do . It is only that Fitzwilliam has better means of having Fitzwilliam own way than many others , because Fitzwilliam is rich , and many others are poor . Fitzwilliam speak feelingly . A younger son , you know , must be inured to self - denial and dependence . ” 
 
  “ In Fitzwilliam opinion , the younger son of an earl can know very little of either . Now seriously , what have Fitzwilliam ever known of self - denial and dependence ? When have Fitzwilliam been prevented by want of money from going wherever Fitzwilliam chose , or procuring anything Fitzwilliam had a fancy for ? ” 
 
  “ These are home questions — and perhaps Fitzwilliam can not say that Fitzwilliam have experienced many hardships of that nature . But in matters of greater weight , Fitzwilliam may suffer from want of money . Younger sons can not marry where Younger sons like . ” 
 
  “ Unless where Younger sons like women of fortune , which Fitzwilliam think Younger sons very often do . ” 
 
  “ Our habits of expense make Our too dependent , and there are not many in Fitzwilliam rank of life who can afford to marry without some attention to money . ” 
 
  “ Is this , ” thought Elizabeth , “ meant for Elizabeth ? ” and Elizabeth coloured at the idea ; but , recovering Elizabeth , said in a lively tone , “ And pray , what is the usual price of an earl ’s younger son ? Unless the elder brother is very sickly , Elizabeth suppose Fitzwilliam would not ask above fifty thousand pounds . ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam answered Elizabeth in the same style , and the subject dropped . To interrupt a silence which might make Fitzwilliam fancy Elizabeth affected with what had passed , Elizabeth soon afterwards said : 
 
  “ Elizabeth imagine Fitzwilliam cousin brought Fitzwilliam down with Fitzwilliam chiefly for the sake of having someone at Fitzwilliam disposal . Elizabeth wonder Fitzwilliam does not marry , to secure a lasting convenience of that kind . But , perhaps , Fitzwilliam sister does as well for the present , and , as Fitzwilliam sister is under Fitzwilliam sole care , Fitzwilliam may do what Fitzwilliam likes with Fitzwilliam sister . ” 
 
  “ No , ” said Fitzwilliam , “ that is an advantage which Fitzwilliam must divide with Fitzwilliam . Fitzwilliam am joined with Fitzwilliam in the guardianship of Georgiana . ” 
 
  “ Are Fitzwilliam indeed ? And pray what sort of guardians do Fitzwilliam make ? Does Fitzwilliam charge give Fitzwilliam much trouble ? Young ladies of Fitzwilliam charge age are sometimes a little difficult to manage , and if Fitzwilliam charge has the true Darcy spirit , Fitzwilliam charge may like to have Fitzwilliam charge own way . ” 
 
  As Elizabeth spoke Elizabeth observed Fitzwilliam looking at Elizabeth earnestly ; and the manner in which Fitzwilliam immediately asked Elizabeth why Elizabeth supposed Georgiana likely to give them any uneasiness , convinced Elizabeth that Elizabeth had somehow or other got pretty near the truth . Elizabeth directly replied : 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam need not be frightened . Elizabeth never heard any harm of Georgiana ; and Elizabeth dare say Georgiana is one of the most tractable creatures in the world . Georgiana is a very great favourite with some ladies of Elizabeth acquaintance , Mrs. Hurst and Caroline . Elizabeth think Elizabeth have heard Fitzwilliam say that Fitzwilliam know some ladies of Elizabeth acquaintance , Mrs. Hurst and Caroline . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam know some ladies of Elizabeth acquaintance , Mrs. Hurst and Caroline a little . some ladies of Elizabeth acquaintance , Mrs. Hurst and Caroline brother is a pleasant gentlemanlike man — some ladies of Elizabeth acquaintance , Mrs. Hurst and Caroline brother is a great friend of Fitzwilliam ’s . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! yes , ” said Elizabeth drily ; “ Fitzwilliam is uncommonly kind to Charles , and takes a prodigious deal of care of Charles . ” 
 
  “ Care of Charles ! Yes , Fitzwilliam really believe Fitzwilliam does take care of Charles in those points where Charles most wants care . From something that Fitzwilliam told Fitzwilliam in their journey hither , Fitzwilliam have reason to think Charles very much indebted to Fitzwilliam . But Fitzwilliam ought to beg Fitzwilliam pardon , for Fitzwilliam have no right to suppose that Charles was the person meant . It was all conjecture . ” 
 
  “ What is it Fitzwilliam mean ? ” 
 
  “ It is a circumstance which Fitzwilliam could not wish to be generally known , because if it were to get round to the lady ’s family , it would be an unpleasant thing . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth may depend upon Fitzwilliam not mentioning it . ” 
 
  “ And remember that Fitzwilliam have not much reason for supposing it to be Charles . What Fitzwilliam told Fitzwilliam was merely this : that Fitzwilliam congratulated Fitzwilliam on having lately saved a friend from the inconveniences of a most imprudent marriage , but without mentioning names or any other particulars , and Fitzwilliam only suspected it to be Charles from believing Charles the kind of young man to get into a scrape of that sort , and from knowing them to have been together the whole of last summer . ” 
 
  “ Did Fitzwilliam give Fitzwilliam reasons for this interference ? ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam understood that there were some very strong objections against the lady ’s . ” 
 
  “ And what arts did Fitzwilliam use to separate them ? ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam did not talk to Fitzwilliam of Fitzwilliam own arts , ” said Fitzwilliam , smiling . “ Fitzwilliam only told Fitzwilliam what Fitzwilliam have now told Elizabeth . ” 
 
  Elizabeth made no answer , and walked on , Elizabeth heart swelling with indignation . After watching Elizabeth a little , Fitzwilliam asked Elizabeth why Elizabeth was so thoughtful . 
 
  “ Elizabeth am thinking of what Fitzwilliam have been telling Elizabeth , ” said Elizabeth . “ Fitzwilliam cousin ’s conduct does not suit Elizabeth feelings . Why was Fitzwilliam to be the judge ? ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth are rather disposed to call Fitzwilliam interference officious ? ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth do not see what right Fitzwilliam had to decide on the propriety of Fitzwilliam friend ’s inclination , or why , upon Fitzwilliam own judgement alone , Fitzwilliam was to determine and direct in what manner Fitzwilliam friend was to be happy . But , ” Elizabeth continued , recollecting Elizabeth , “ as we know none of the particulars , it is not fair to condemn Fitzwilliam . It is not to be supposed that there was much affection in the case . ” 
 
  “ That is not an unnatural surmise , ” said Fitzwilliam , “ but That is a lessening of the honour of Fitzwilliam triumph very sadly . ” 
 
  This was spoken jestingly ; but it appeared to Elizabeth so just a picture of Fitzwilliam , that Elizabeth would not trust Elizabeth with an answer , and therefore , abruptly changing the conversation talked on indifferent matters until their reached the Parsonage . There , shut into Elizabeth own room , as soon as Fitzwilliam left their , Elizabeth could think without interruption of all that Elizabeth had heard . It was not to be supposed that any other people could be meant than those with whom Elizabeth was connected . There could not exist in the world two men over whom Fitzwilliam could have such boundless influence . That Fitzwilliam had been concerned in the measures taken to separate Charles and Jane ’s Elizabeth had never doubted ; but Elizabeth had always attributed to Caroline the principal design and arrangement of the measures taken to separate Charles and Jane ’s . If Caroline own vanity , however , did not mislead Caroline , Caroline was the cause , Caroline pride and caprice were the cause , of all that Jane ’s had suffered , and still continued to suffer . Caroline had ruined for a while every hope of happiness for the most affectionate , generous heart in the world ; and no one could say how lasting an evil Caroline might have inflicted . 
 
  “ There were some very strong objections against the lady ’s , ” were Fitzwilliam words ; and some very strong objections against the lady ’s probably were , the lady ’s having one uncle who was a country attorney , and another who was in business in London . 
 
  “ To Jane ’s , ” Fitzwilliam exclaimed , “ there could be no possibility of objection ; all loveliness and goodness as the lady ’s is!—her understanding excellent , the lady ’s mind improved , and the lady ’s manners captivating . Neither could anything be urged against Fitzwilliam father , who , though with some peculiarities , has abilities Fitzwilliam Fitzwilliam need not disdain , and respectability which Fitzwilliam will probably never reach . ” When Elizabeth thought of Elizabeth mother , Elizabeth confidence gave way a little ; but Elizabeth would not allow that any objections there had material weight with Fitzwilliam , whose pride , Elizabeth was convinced , would receive a deeper wound from the want of importance in the lady ’s connections , than from the lady ’s connections want of sense ; and Elizabeth was quite decided , at last , that Fitzwilliam had been partly governed by this worst kind of pride , and partly by the wish of retaining Charles for Fitzwilliam sister . 
 
  The agitation and tears which the subject occasioned , brought on a headache ; and a headache grew so much worse towards the evening , that , added to Elizabeth unwillingness to see Fitzwilliam , a headache determined Elizabeth not to attend Elizabeth cousins to Rosings , where Elizabeth cousins were engaged to drink tea . Mrs. Collins ’s , seeing that Elizabeth was really unwell , did not press Elizabeth to go and as much as possible prevented Elizabeth husband from pressing Elizabeth ; but Elizabeth husband could not conceal Elizabeth husband apprehension of Cathleen ’s being rather displeased by Elizabeth staying at home . 
 Chapter 
 
  When they were gone , Elizabeth , as if intending to exasperate Elizabeth as much as possible against Fitzwilliam , chose for Elizabeth employment the examination of all the letters which Jane had written to Elizabeth since Jane being in Kent . all the letters which Jane had written to Elizabeth since Jane being in Kent contained no actual complaint , nor was there any revival of past occurrences , or any communication of present suffering . But in all , and in almost every line of each , there was a want of that cheerfulness which had been used to characterise Jane style , and which , proceeding from the serenity of a mind at ease with a mind at ease with and kindly disposed towards everyone , had been scarcely ever clouded . Elizabeth noticed every sentence conveying the idea of uneasiness , with an attention which every sentence conveying the idea of uneasiness had hardly received on the first perusal . Fitzwilliam ’s shameful boast of what misery Fitzwilliam had been able to inflict , gave Elizabeth a keener sense of Jane sufferings . It was some consolation to think that Fitzwilliam visit to Rosings was to end on the day after the next — and , a still greater , that in less than a fortnight Elizabeth should Elizabeth be with Jane again , and enabled to contribute to the recovery of Jane spirits , by all that affection could do . 
 
  Elizabeth could not think of Fitzwilliam ’s leaving Kent without remembering that Fitzwilliam cousin was to go with Fitzwilliam ; but Fitzwilliam had made it clear that Fitzwilliam had no intentions at all , and agreeable as Fitzwilliam was , Elizabeth did not mean to be unhappy about Fitzwilliam . 
 
  While settling this point , Elizabeth was suddenly roused by the sound of the door - bell , and Elizabeth spirits were a little fluttered by the idea of the door - bell being Fitzwilliam . But the idea of the door - bell being Fitzwilliam was soon banished , and Elizabeth spirits were very differently affected , when , to Elizabeth utter amazement , Elizabeth saw Fitzwilliam walk into the room . In an hurried manner Fitzwilliam immediately began an enquiry after Elizabeth health , imputing Fitzwilliam visit to a wish of hearing that Elizabeth were better . Elizabeth answered Fitzwilliam with cold civility . Fitzwilliam sat down for a few moments , and then getting up , walked about the room . Elizabeth was surprised , but said not a word . After a silence of several minutes , Fitzwilliam came towards Elizabeth in an agitated manner , and thus began : 
 
  “ In vain Fitzwilliam have struggled . It will not do . Fitzwilliam feelings will not be repressed . Elizabeth must allow Fitzwilliam to tell Elizabeth how ardently Fitzwilliam admire and love Elizabeth . ” 
 
  Elizabeth ’s astonishment was beyond expression . Elizabeth stared , coloured , doubted , and was silent . tell Fitzwilliam considered sufficient encouragement ; and the avowal of all that Fitzwilliam felt , and had long felt for Elizabeth , immediately followed . Fitzwilliam spoke well ; but there were feelings besides those of the heart to be detailed ; and Fitzwilliam was not more eloquent on the subject of tenderness than of pride . Fitzwilliam sense of Elizabeth inferiority — of Elizabeth inferiority being a degradation — of the family obstacles which had always opposed to inclination , were dwelt on with a warmth which seemed due to the consequence Fitzwilliam was wounding , but was very unlikely to recommend Fitzwilliam suit . 
 
  In spite of Elizabeth deeply - rooted dislike , Elizabeth could not be insensible to the compliment of such a man ’s affection , and though Elizabeth intentions did not vary for an instant , Elizabeth was at first sorry for the pain Fitzwilliam was to receive ; till , roused to resentment by Fitzwilliam subsequent language , Elizabeth lost all compassion in anger . Elizabeth tried , however , to compose Elizabeth to answer Fitzwilliam with patience , when Fitzwilliam should have done . Fitzwilliam concluded with representing to Elizabeth the strength of that attachment which , in spite of all Fitzwilliam endeavours , Fitzwilliam had found impossible to conquer ; and with expressing Fitzwilliam hope that that attachment which , in spite of all Fitzwilliam endeavours , Fitzwilliam had found impossible to conquer would now be rewarded by Elizabeth acceptance of Fitzwilliam hand . As Fitzwilliam said this , Elizabeth could easily see that Fitzwilliam had no doubt of a favourable answer . Fitzwilliam spoke of apprehension and anxiety , but Fitzwilliam countenance expressed real security . Such a circumstance could only exasperate farther , and , when Fitzwilliam ceased , the colour rose into Elizabeth cheeks , and Elizabeth said : 
 
  “ In such cases as this , it is , Elizabeth believe , the established mode to express a sense of obligation for the sentiments avowed , however unequally the sentiments avowed may be returned . It is natural that obligation should be felt , and if Elizabeth could feel gratitude , Elizabeth would now thank Fitzwilliam . But Elizabeth cannot — Elizabeth have never desired Fitzwilliam good opinion , and Fitzwilliam have certainly bestowed Fitzwilliam good opinion most unwillingly . Elizabeth am sorry to have occasioned pain to anyone . occasioned has been most unconsciously done , however , and Elizabeth hope will be of short duration . The feelings which , Fitzwilliam tell Elizabeth , have long prevented the acknowledgment of Fitzwilliam regard , can have little difficulty in overcoming it after this explanation . ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam , who was leaning against the mantelpiece with Fitzwilliam eyes fixed on Elizabeth face , seemed to catch Elizabeth words with no less resentment than surprise . Fitzwilliam complexion became pale with anger , and the disturbance of Fitzwilliam mind was visible in every feature . Fitzwilliam was struggling for the appearance of composure , and would not open Fitzwilliam lips till Fitzwilliam believed Fitzwilliam to have attained the appearance of composure . The pause was to Elizabeth ’s feelings dreadful . At length , with a voice of forced calmness , Fitzwilliam said : 
 
  “ And this is all the reply which Fitzwilliam am to have the honour of expecting ! Fitzwilliam might , perhaps , wish to be informed why , with so little endeavour at civility , Fitzwilliam am thus rejected . But it is of small importance . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth might as well enquire , ” replied Elizabeth , “ why with so evident a desire of offending and insulting Elizabeth , Fitzwilliam chose to tell Elizabeth that Fitzwilliam liked Elizabeth against Fitzwilliam will , against Fitzwilliam reason , and even against Fitzwilliam character ? Was not tell some excuse for incivility , if Elizabeth was uncivil ? But Elizabeth have other provocations . Fitzwilliam know Elizabeth have . Had not Elizabeth feelings decided against Fitzwilliam — had Elizabeth feelings been indifferent , or had Elizabeth feelings even been favourable , do Fitzwilliam think that any consideration would tempt Elizabeth to accept Elizabeth ? ” 
 
  As Elizabeth pronounced these words , Fitzwilliam changed colour ; but changed was short , and Fitzwilliam listened without attempting to interrupt Elizabeth while Elizabeth continued : 
 
  “ Elizabeth have every reason in the world to think ill of Fitzwilliam . No motive can excuse the unjust and ungenerous part Fitzwilliam acted there . Fitzwilliam dare not , Fitzwilliam can not deny , that Fitzwilliam have been the principal , if not the only means of dividing them from each other — of exposing one to the censure of the world for caprice and instability , and the other to the world derision for disappointed hopes , and involving them both in misery of the acutest kind . ” 
 
  Elizabeth paused , and saw with no slight indignation that Fitzwilliam was listening with an air which proved Fitzwilliam wholly unmoved by any feeling of remorse . Fitzwilliam even looked at Elizabeth with a smile of affected incredulity . 
 
  “ Can Fitzwilliam deny that Fitzwilliam have done it ? ” Elizabeth repeated . 
 
  With assumed tranquillity Fitzwilliam then replied : “ Fitzwilliam have no wish of denying that Fitzwilliam did everything in Fitzwilliam power to separate Fitzwilliam friend from a most beloved sister , or that Fitzwilliam rejoice in Fitzwilliam success . Towards Fitzwilliam Fitzwilliam have been kinder than towards Fitzwilliam . ” 
 
  Elizabeth disdained the appearance of noticing this civil reflection , but this civil reflection meaning did not escape , nor was this civil reflection likely to conciliate Elizabeth . 
 
  “ But it is not merely this affair , ” Elizabeth continued , “ on which Elizabeth dislike is founded . Long before this civil reflection had taken place Elizabeth opinion of Fitzwilliam was decided . Fitzwilliam character was unfolded in the recital which Elizabeth received many months ago from Charlie . On this subject , what can Fitzwilliam have to say ? In what imaginary act of friendship can Fitzwilliam here defend Fitzwilliam ? or under what misrepresentation can Fitzwilliam here impose upon others ? ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth take an eager interest in Fitzwilliam concerns , ” said Fitzwilliam , in a less tranquil tone , and with a heightened colour . 
 
  “ Who that knows what Fitzwilliam misfortunes have been , can help feeling an interest in Fitzwilliam ? ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam misfortunes ! ” repeated Fitzwilliam contemptuously ; “ yes , Fitzwilliam misfortunes have been great indeed . ” 
 
  “ And of Fitzwilliam infliction , ” cried Elizabeth with energy . “ Fitzwilliam have reduced Fitzwilliam to Fitzwilliam present state of poverty — comparative poverty . Fitzwilliam have withheld the advantages which Fitzwilliam must know to have been designed for Fitzwilliam . Fitzwilliam have deprived the best years of Fitzwilliam life of that independence which was no less Fitzwilliam due than Fitzwilliam desert . Fitzwilliam have done all this ! and yet Fitzwilliam can treat the mention of Fitzwilliam misfortune with contempt and ridicule . ” 
 
  “ And this , ” cried Fitzwilliam , as Fitzwilliam walked with quick steps across the room , “ is Elizabeth opinion of Fitzwilliam ! This is the estimation in which Elizabeth hold Fitzwilliam ! Fitzwilliam thank Elizabeth for explaining it so fully . Fitzwilliam faults , according to this calculation , are heavy indeed ! But perhaps , ” added Fitzwilliam , stopping in Fitzwilliam walk , and turning towards Elizabeth , “ Fitzwilliam faults might have been overlooked , had not Elizabeth pride been hurt by Fitzwilliam honest confession of the scruples that had long prevented Fitzwilliam forming any serious design . These bitter accusations might have been suppressed , had Fitzwilliam , with greater policy , concealed Fitzwilliam struggles , and flattered Elizabeth into the belief of Fitzwilliam being impelled by unqualified , unalloyed inclination ; by reason , by reflection , by everything . But disguise of every sort is Fitzwilliam abhorrence . Nor am Fitzwilliam ashamed of the feelings Fitzwilliam related . the feelings Fitzwilliam related were natural and just . Could Elizabeth expect Fitzwilliam to rejoice in the inferiority of Elizabeth connections?—to congratulate Fitzwilliam on the hope of relations , whose condition in life is so decidedly beneath Fitzwilliam own ? ” 
 
  Elizabeth felt Elizabeth growing more angry every moment ; yet Elizabeth tried to the utmost to speak with composure when Elizabeth said : 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam are mistaken , Fitzwilliam , if Fitzwilliam suppose that the mode of Fitzwilliam declaration affected Elizabeth in any other way , than as the mode of Fitzwilliam declaration spared Elizabeth the concern which Elizabeth might have felt in refusing Fitzwilliam , had Fitzwilliam behaved in a more gentlemanlike manner . ” 
 
  Elizabeth saw Fitzwilliam start at this , but Fitzwilliam said nothing , and Elizabeth continued : 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam could not have made the offer of Fitzwilliam hand in any possible way that would have tempted Elizabeth to accept the offer of Fitzwilliam hand . ” 
 
  Again Fitzwilliam astonishment was obvious ; and Fitzwilliam looked at Elizabeth with an expression of mingled incredulity and mortification . Elizabeth went on : 
 
  “ From the very beginning — from the first moment , Elizabeth may almost say — of Elizabeth acquaintance with Fitzwilliam , Fitzwilliam manners , impressing Elizabeth with the fullest belief of Fitzwilliam arrogance , Fitzwilliam conceit , and Fitzwilliam selfish disdain of the feelings of others , were such as to form the groundwork of disapprobation on which succeeding events have built so immovable a dislike ; and Elizabeth had not known Fitzwilliam a month before Elizabeth felt that Fitzwilliam were the last man in the world whom Elizabeth could ever be prevailed on to marry . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth have said quite enough , Elizabeth . Fitzwilliam perfectly comprehend Elizabeth feelings , and have now only to be ashamed of what Fitzwilliam own have been . Forgive Fitzwilliam for having taken up so much of Elizabeth time , and accept Fitzwilliam best wishes for Elizabeth health and happiness . ” 
 
  And with these words Fitzwilliam hastily left the room , and Elizabeth heard Fitzwilliam the next moment open the front door and quit the house . 
 
  The tumult of Elizabeth mind , was now painfully great . Elizabeth knew not how to support Elizabeth , and from actual weakness sat down and cried for half - an - hour . Elizabeth astonishment , as Elizabeth reflected on what had passed , was increased by every review of it . That Elizabeth should receive an offer of marriage from Fitzwilliam ! That Fitzwilliam should have been in love with Elizabeth for so many months ! So much in love as to wish to marry Elizabeth in spite of all the objections which had made Fitzwilliam prevent Fitzwilliam marrying Fitzwilliam sister , and which must appear at least with equal force in Fitzwilliam own case — was almost incredible ! It was gratifying to have inspired unconsciously so strong an affection . But Fitzwilliam pride , Fitzwilliam abominable pride — Fitzwilliam shameless avowal of what Fitzwilliam had done with respect to Jane — Fitzwilliam unpardonable assurance in acknowledging , though Fitzwilliam could not justify it , and the unfeeling manner in which Fitzwilliam had mentioned Charlie , Fitzwilliam cruelty towards whom Fitzwilliam had not attempted to deny , soon overcame the pity which the consideration of Fitzwilliam attachment had for a moment excited . Elizabeth continued in very agitated reflections till the sound of Cathleen ’s carriage made Elizabeth feel how unequal Elizabeth was to encounter Charlie observation , and hurried Elizabeth away to Elizabeth room . 
 Chapter 
 
  Elizabeth awoke the next morning to the same thoughts and meditations which had at length closed Elizabeth eyes . Elizabeth could not yet recover from the surprise of what had happened ; it was impossible to think of anything else ; and , totally indisposed for employment , Elizabeth resolved , soon after breakfast , to indulge Elizabeth in air and exercise . Elizabeth was proceeding directly to Elizabeth favourite walk , when the recollection of Fitzwilliam ’s sometimes coming there stopped Elizabeth , and instead of entering the park , Elizabeth turned up the lane , which led farther from the turnpike - road . The park paling was still the boundary on one side , and Elizabeth soon passed one of the gates into the ground . 
 
  After walking two or three times along that part of the lane , which led farther from the turnpike - road , Elizabeth was tempted , by the pleasantness of the morning , to stop at the gates and look into the park . The five weeks which Elizabeth had now passed in Kent had made a great difference in the country , and every day was adding to the verdure of the early trees . Elizabeth was on the point of continuing Elizabeth walk , when Elizabeth caught a glimpse of a gentleman within the sort of grove which edged the park ; a gentleman was moving that way ; and , fearful of its being Fitzwilliam ’s , Elizabeth was directly retreating . But a gentleman was now near enough to see Elizabeth , and stepping forward with eagerness , pronounced Elizabeth name . Elizabeth had turned away ; but on hearing Elizabeth called , though in a voice which proved it to be Fitzwilliam ’s , Elizabeth moved again towards the gates . a gentleman had by that time reached the gates also , and , holding out a letter , which Elizabeth instinctively took , said , with a look of haughty composure , “ a gentleman have been walking in the sort of grove which edged the park some time in the hope of meeting Elizabeth . Will Elizabeth do a gentleman the honour of reading a letter , which Elizabeth instinctively took ? ” And then , with a slight bow , turned again into the plantation , and was soon out of sight . 
 
  With no expectation of pleasure , but with the strongest curiosity , Elizabeth opened a letter , which Elizabeth instinctively took , and , to Elizabeth still increasing wonder , perceived an envelope containing two sheets of letter - paper , written quite through , in a very close hand . an envelope containing two sheets of letter - paper , written quite through , in a very close hand an envelope containing two sheets of letter - paper , written quite through , in a very close hand was likewise full . Pursuing Elizabeth way along the lane , which led farther from the turnpike - road , Elizabeth then began it . a letter , which Elizabeth instinctively took was dated from Rosings , at eight o’clock in the morning , and was as follows : — 
 
  “ Be not alarmed , Elizabeth , on receiving a letter , which Elizabeth instinctively took , by the apprehension of a letter , which Elizabeth instinctively took containing any repetition of those sentiments or renewal of those offers which were last night so disgusting to Elizabeth . Elizabeth write without any intention of paining Elizabeth , or humbling Elizabeth , by dwelling on wishes which , for the happiness of both , can not be too soon forgotten ; and the effort which the formation and the perusal of a letter , which Elizabeth instinctively took must occasion , should have been spared , had not Elizabeth character required a letter , which Elizabeth instinctively took to be written and read . Elizabeth must , therefore , pardon the freedom with which Elizabeth demand Elizabeth attention ; Elizabeth feelings , Elizabeth know , will bestow Elizabeth attention unwillingly , but Elizabeth demand Elizabeth attention of Elizabeth justice . 
 
  “ Two offenses of a very different nature , and by no means of equal magnitude , Elizabeth last night laid to Elizabeth charge . The first mentioned was , that , regardless of the sentiments of either , Elizabeth had detached Charles from Elizabeth sister , and the other , that Elizabeth had , in defiance of various claims , in defiance of honour and humanity , ruined the immediate prosperity and blasted the prospects of Elizabeth sister . Wilfully and wantonly to have thrown off the companion of Elizabeth youth , the acknowledged favourite of Elizabeth father , a young man who had scarcely any other dependence than on our patronage , and who had been brought up to expect its exertion , would be a depravity , to which the separation of two young persons , whose affection could be the growth of only a few weeks , could bear no comparison . But from the severity of that blame which was last night so liberally bestowed , respecting each circumstance , Elizabeth shall hope to be in the future secured , when the following account of Elizabeth actions and Elizabeth actions motives has been read . If , in the explanation of Elizabeth actions , which is due to Elizabeth , Elizabeth am under the necessity of relating feelings which may be offensive to Elizabeth , Elizabeth can only say that Elizabeth am sorry . The necessity must be obeyed , and further apology would be absurd . 
 
  “ Elizabeth had not been long in Hertfordshire , before Elizabeth saw , in common with others , that Charles preferred Elizabeth elder sister to any other young woman in the country . But it was not till the evening of the dance at Netherfield that Elizabeth had any apprehension of Charles feeling a serious attachment . Elizabeth had often seen Charles in love before . At the dance at Netherfield , while Elizabeth had the honour of dancing with Elizabeth , Elizabeth was first made acquainted , by Sir William Lucas ’s accidental information , that Charles ’s attentions to Elizabeth sister had given rise to a general expectation of their marriage . Sir William Lucas ’s spoke of their marriage as a certain event , of which the time alone could be undecided . From that moment Elizabeth observed Sir William Lucas ’s behaviour attentively ; and Elizabeth could then perceive that Sir William Lucas ’s partiality for Elizabeth sister was beyond what Elizabeth had ever witnessed in Sir William Lucas ’s . Elizabeth sister Elizabeth also watched . Elizabeth sister look and manners were open , cheerful , and engaging as ever , but without any symptom of peculiar regard , and Elizabeth remained convinced from the evening ’s scrutiny , that though Elizabeth sister received Sir William Lucas ’s attentions with pleasure , Elizabeth sister did not invite Sir William Lucas ’s attentions by any participation of sentiment . If Elizabeth have not been mistaken here , Elizabeth must have been in error . Elizabeth superior knowledge of Elizabeth sister must make the latter probable . If it be so , if Elizabeth have been misled by such error to inflict pain on Elizabeth sister , Elizabeth resentment has not been unreasonable . But Elizabeth shall not scruple to assert , that the serenity of Elizabeth sister ’s countenance and air was such as might have given the most acute observer a conviction that , however amiable Elizabeth sister temper , Elizabeth sister heart was not likely to be easily touched . That Elizabeth was desirous of believing Elizabeth sister indifferent is certain — but Elizabeth will venture to say that Elizabeth investigation and decisions are not usually influenced by Elizabeth hopes or fears . Elizabeth did not believe Elizabeth sister to be indifferent because Elizabeth wished be ; Elizabeth believed be on impartial conviction , as truly as Elizabeth wished be in reason . Elizabeth objections to their marriage were not merely those which Elizabeth last night acknowledged to have required the utmost force of passion to put aside , in Elizabeth own case ; the want of connection could not be so great an evil to Sir William Lucas ’s as to Elizabeth . But there were other causes of repugnance ; causes which , though still existing , and existing to an equal degree in both instances , Elizabeth had Elizabeth endeavoured to forget , because other causes of repugnance were not immediately before Elizabeth . other causes of repugnance must be stated , though briefly . The situation of Elizabeth mother ’s family , though objectionable , was nothing in comparison to that total want of propriety so frequently , so almost uniformly betrayed by Elizabeth mother ’s , by Elizabeth three younger sisters , and occasionally even by Elizabeth father . Pardon Elizabeth . It pains Elizabeth to offend Elizabeth . But amidst Elizabeth concern for the defects of Elizabeth nearest relations , and Elizabeth displeasure at this representation of Elizabeth nearest relations , let it give Elizabeth consolation to consider that , to have conducted Elizabeth so as to avoid any share of the like censure , is praise no less generally bestowed on Elizabeth Elizabeth elder sister , than it is honourable to the sense and disposition of Elizabeth . Elizabeth will only say farther that from what passed that evening , Elizabeth opinion of all parties was confirmed , and every inducement heightened which could have led Elizabeth before , to preserve Elizabeth friend from what Elizabeth esteemed a most unhappy connection . Sir William Lucas ’s left Netherfield for London , on the day following , as Elizabeth , Elizabeth am certain , remember , with the design of soon returning . 
 
  “ The part which Elizabeth acted is now to be explained . Sir William Lucas ’s sisters ’ uneasiness had been equally excited with Elizabeth own ; our coincidence of feeling was soon discovered , and , alike sensible that no time was to be lost in detaching Sir William Lucas ’s , we shortly resolved on joining Sir William Lucas ’s directly in London . We accordingly went — and there Elizabeth readily engaged in the office of pointing out to Sir William Lucas ’s the certain evils of such a choice . Elizabeth described , and enforced the certain evils of such a choice earnestly . But , however this remonstrance might have staggered or delayed Sir William Lucas ’s determination , Elizabeth do not suppose that this remonstrance would ultimately have prevented their marriage , had this remonstrance not been seconded by the assurance that Elizabeth hesitated not in giving , of Elizabeth sister ’s indifference . Sir William Lucas ’s had before believed Elizabeth sister to return Sir William Lucas ’s affection with sincere , if not with equal regard . But Charles has great natural modesty , with a stronger dependence on Elizabeth judgement than on Sir William Lucas ’s own . To convince Sir William Lucas ’s , therefore , that Sir William Lucas ’s had deceived Sir William Lucas ’s , was no very difficult point . To persuade Sir William Lucas ’s against returning into Hertfordshire , when that conviction had been given , was scarcely the work of a moment . Elizabeth can not blame Elizabeth for having done thus much . There is but one part of Elizabeth conduct in the whole affair on which Elizabeth do not reflect with satisfaction ; but one part of Elizabeth conduct in the whole affair on which Elizabeth do not reflect with satisfaction is that Elizabeth condescended to adopt the measures of art so far as to conceal from Sir William Lucas ’s Elizabeth sister ’s being in town . Elizabeth knew Elizabeth sister ’s being in town Elizabeth , as Elizabeth sister ’s being in town was known to Caroline ; but Caroline brother is even yet ignorant of Elizabeth sister ’s being in town . That they might have met without ill consequence is perhaps probable ; but Sir William Lucas ’s regard did not appear to Elizabeth enough extinguished for Sir William Lucas ’s to see Elizabeth sister without some danger . Perhaps this concealment , this disguise was beneath Elizabeth ; this concealment , this disguise is done , however , and this concealment , this disguise was done for the best . On this subject Elizabeth have nothing more to say , no other apology to offer . If Elizabeth have wounded Elizabeth sister ’s feelings , wounded was unknowingly done and though the motives which governed Elizabeth may to Elizabeth very naturally appear insufficient , Elizabeth have not yet learnt to condemn the motives which governed Elizabeth . 
 
  “ With respect to that other , more weighty accusation , of having injured Elizabeth sister , Elizabeth can only refute that other , more weighty accusation , of having injured Elizabeth sister by laying before Elizabeth the whole of Elizabeth sister connection with Elizabeth mother ’s family . Of what Elizabeth sister has particularly accused Elizabeth Elizabeth am ignorant ; but of the truth of what Elizabeth shall relate , Elizabeth can summon more than one witness of undoubted veracity . 
 
  “ Elizabeth sister is the son of a very respectable man , who had for many years the management of all the Pemberley estates , and whose good conduct in the discharge of his trust naturally inclined Elizabeth father to be of service to his ; and on George , who was his godson , his kindness was therefore liberally bestowed . Elizabeth father supported Elizabeth sister at school , and afterwards at Cambridge — most important assistance , as Elizabeth sister own father , always poor from the extravagance of Elizabeth sister , would have been unable to give Elizabeth sister a gentleman ’s education . Elizabeth father was not only fond of Elizabeth sister society , whose manners were always engaging ; Elizabeth father had also the highest opinion of Elizabeth sister , and hoping the church would be Elizabeth sister profession , intended to provide for Elizabeth sister in the church . As for Elizabeth , it is many , many years since Elizabeth first began to think of Elizabeth sister in a very different manner . The vicious propensities — the want of principle , which Elizabeth sister was careful to guard from the knowledge of Elizabeth sister best friend , could not escape the observation of a young man of nearly the same age with Elizabeth sister , and who had opportunities of seeing Elizabeth sister in unguarded moments , which Fitzwilliam ’s could not have . Here again Elizabeth shall give Elizabeth pain — to what degree Elizabeth only can tell . But whatever may be the sentiments which Elizabeth sister has created , a suspicion of the sentiments which Elizabeth sister has created nature shall not prevent Elizabeth from unfolding Elizabeth sister real character — it adds even another motive . 
 
  “ Elizabeth father died about five years ago ; and Elizabeth father attachment to Elizabeth sister was to the last so steady , that in Elizabeth father will Elizabeth father particularly recommended it to Elizabeth , to promote Elizabeth sister advancement in the best manner that Elizabeth sister profession might allow — and if Elizabeth sister took orders , desired that a valuable family living might be Elizabeth sister as soon as a valuable family living became vacant . There was also a legacy of one thousand pounds . Elizabeth father did not long survive Elizabeth , and within half a year from these events , Elizabeth sister wrote to inform Elizabeth that , having finally resolved against taking orders , Elizabeth sister hoped Elizabeth should not think it unreasonable for Elizabeth sister to expect some more immediate pecuniary advantage , in lieu of the preferment , by which Elizabeth sister could not be benefited . Elizabeth sister had some intention , Elizabeth sister added , of studying law , and Elizabeth must be aware that the interest of one thousand pounds would be a very insufficient support therein . Elizabeth rather wished , than believed Elizabeth sister to be sincere ; but , at any rate , was perfectly ready to accede to Elizabeth sister proposal . Elizabeth knew that Elizabeth sister ought not to be a clergyman ; the business was therefore soon settled — Elizabeth sister resigned all claim to assistance in the church , were it possible that Elizabeth sister could ever be in a situation to receive assistance in the church , and accepted in return three thousand pounds . All connection between us seemed now dissolved . Elizabeth thought too ill of Elizabeth sister to invite Elizabeth sister to Pemberley , or admit Elizabeth sister society in town . In town Elizabeth believe Elizabeth sister chiefly lived , but Elizabeth sister studying the law was a mere pretence , and being now free from all restraint , Elizabeth sister life was a life of idleness and dissipation . For about three years Elizabeth heard little of Elizabeth sister ; but on the decease of the incumbent of the living which had been designed for Elizabeth sister , Elizabeth sister applied to Elizabeth again by letter for the presentation . Elizabeth sister circumstances , Elizabeth sister assured Elizabeth , and Elizabeth had no difficulty in believing it , were exceedingly bad . Elizabeth sister had found the law a most unprofitable study , and was now absolutely resolved on being ordained , if Elizabeth would present Elizabeth sister to the living in question — of which Elizabeth sister trusted there could be little doubt , as Elizabeth sister was well assured that Elizabeth had no other person to provide for , and Elizabeth could not have forgotten Elizabeth revered father ’s intentions . Elizabeth will hardly blame Elizabeth for refusing to comply with this entreaty , or for resisting every repetition to this entreaty . Elizabeth sister resentment was in proportion to the distress of Elizabeth sister circumstances — and Elizabeth sister was doubtless as violent in Elizabeth sister abuse of Elizabeth to others as in Elizabeth sister reproaches to Elizabeth . After this period every appearance of acquaintance was dropped . How Elizabeth sister lived Elizabeth know not . But last summer Elizabeth sister was again most painfully obtruded on Elizabeth notice . 
 
  “ Elizabeth must now mention a circumstance which Elizabeth would wish to forget Elizabeth , and which no obligation less than the present should induce Elizabeth to unfold to any human being . Having said thus much , Elizabeth feel no doubt of Elizabeth secrecy . Elizabeth sister , who is more than ten years Elizabeth junior , was left to the guardianship of Elizabeth mother ’s nephew , Fitzwilam , and Elizabeth . About a year ago , Elizabeth sister , who is more than ten years Elizabeth junior was taken from school , and an establishment formed for Elizabeth sister , who is more than ten years Elizabeth junior in London ; and last summer Elizabeth sister , who is more than ten years Elizabeth junior went with the lady who presided over an establishment , to Ramsgate ; and thither also went Elizabeth sister , undoubtedly by design ; for there proved to have been a prior acquaintance between Elizabeth sister and the lady who presided over an establishment ; and by the lady who presided over an establishment connivance and aid , Elizabeth sister so far recommended Elizabeth sister to Georgiana , whose affectionate heart retained a strong impression of Elizabeth sister kindness to Georgiana , whose affectionate heart retained a strong impression of Elizabeth sister kindness to as a child , that Georgiana , whose affectionate heart retained a strong impression of Elizabeth sister kindness to was persuaded to believe Georgiana , whose affectionate heart retained a strong impression of Elizabeth sister kindness to in love , and to consent to an elopement . Georgiana , whose affectionate heart retained a strong impression of Elizabeth sister kindness to was then but fifteen , which must be Georgiana , whose affectionate heart retained a strong impression of Elizabeth sister kindness to excuse ; and after stating Georgiana , whose affectionate heart retained a strong impression of Elizabeth sister kindness to imprudence , Elizabeth am happy to add , that Elizabeth owed the knowledge of Georgiana , whose affectionate heart retained a strong impression of Elizabeth sister kindness to imprudence to Georgiana , whose affectionate heart retained a strong impression of Elizabeth sister kindness to . Elizabeth joined them unexpectedly a day or two before an elopement , and then Georgiana , whose affectionate heart retained a strong impression of Elizabeth sister kindness to , unable to support the idea of grieving and offending Elizabeth sister , acknowledged the whole to Elizabeth . Elizabeth may imagine what Elizabeth felt and how Elizabeth acted . Regard for Elizabeth sister credit and feelings prevented any public exposure ; but Elizabeth wrote to Elizabeth sister , and the lady who presided over an establishment was of course removed from the lady who presided over an establishment charge . Elizabeth sister chief object was unquestionably Elizabeth sister ’s fortune , which is thirty thousand pounds ; but Elizabeth can not help supposing that the hope of revenging Elizabeth sister on Elizabeth was a strong inducement . Elizabeth sister revenge would have been complete indeed . 
 
  “ a letter , which Elizabeth instinctively took , Elizabeth , is a faithful narrative of every event in which us have been concerned together ; and if Elizabeth do not absolutely reject a letter , which Elizabeth instinctively took as false , Elizabeth will , Elizabeth hope , acquit Elizabeth henceforth of cruelty towards Elizabeth sister . Elizabeth know not in what manner , under what form of falsehood Elizabeth sister had imposed on Elizabeth ; but Elizabeth sister success is not perhaps to be wondered at . Ignorant as Elizabeth previously were of everything concerning either , detection could not be in Elizabeth power , and suspicion certainly not in Elizabeth inclination . 
 
  “ Elizabeth may possibly wonder why all this was not told Elizabeth last night ; but Elizabeth was not then master enough of Elizabeth to know what could or ought to be revealed . For the truth of everything here related , Elizabeth can appeal more particularly to the testimony of Fitzwilam , who , from our near relationship and constant intimacy , and , still more , as one of the executors of Elizabeth father ’s will , has been unavoidably acquainted with every particular of these transactions . If Elizabeth abhorrence of Elizabeth should make Elizabeth assertions valueless , Elizabeth can not be prevented by the same cause from confiding in Elizabeth cousin ; and that there may be the possibility of consulting Elizabeth cousin , Elizabeth shall endeavour to find some opportunity of putting a letter , which Elizabeth instinctively took in Elizabeth hands in the course of the morning . Elizabeth will only add , God bless Elizabeth . 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam ’s ” 
 Chapter 
 
  If Elizabeth , when Fitzwilliam gave Elizabeth the letter , did not expect the letter to contain a renewal of Fitzwilliam offers , Elizabeth had formed no expectation at all of the letter contents . But such as the letter contents were , it may well be supposed how eagerly Elizabeth went through the letter contents , and what a contrariety of emotion the letter contents excited . Elizabeth feelings as Elizabeth read were scarcely to be defined . With amazement did Elizabeth first understand that Fitzwilliam believed any apology to be in Fitzwilliam power ; and steadfastly was Elizabeth persuaded , that Fitzwilliam could have no explanation to give , which a just sense of shame would not conceal . With a strong prejudice against everything Fitzwilliam might say , Elizabeth began Fitzwilliam account of what had happened at Netherfield . Elizabeth read with an eagerness which hardly left Elizabeth power of comprehension , and from impatience of knowing what the next sentence might bring , was incapable of attending to the sense of the one before Elizabeth eyes . Fitzwilliam belief of Elizabeth sister ’s insensibility Elizabeth instantly resolved to be false ; and Fitzwilliam account of the real , the worst objections to the match , made Elizabeth too angry to have any wish of doing Fitzwilliam justice . Fitzwilliam expressed no regret for what Fitzwilliam had done which satisfied Elizabeth ; Fitzwilliam style was not penitent , but haughty . Fitzwilliam style was all pride and insolence . 
 
  But when this subject was succeeded by Fitzwilliam account of Charlie — when Elizabeth read with somewhat clearer attention a relation of events which , if true , must overthrow every cherished opinion of Fitzwilliam worth , and which bore so alarming an affinity to Fitzwilliam own history of Fitzwilliam — Elizabeth feelings were yet more acutely painful and more difficult of definition . Astonishment , apprehension , and even horror , oppressed Elizabeth . Elizabeth wished to discredit Fitzwilliam account of the real , the worst objections to the match entirely , repeatedly exclaiming , “ Fitzwilliam account of the real , the worst objections to the match must be false ! Fitzwilliam account of the real , the worst objections to the match can not be ! Fitzwilliam account of the real , the worst objections to the match must be the grossest falsehood!”—and when Elizabeth had gone through the letter , though scarcely knowing anything of the last page or two , put the letter hastily away , protesting that Elizabeth would not regard the letter , that Elizabeth would never look in the letter again . 
 
  In this perturbed state of mind , with thoughts that could rest on nothing , Elizabeth walked on ; but it would not do ; in half a minute the letter was unfolded again , and collecting Elizabeth as well as Elizabeth could , Elizabeth again began the mortifying perusal of all that related to George , and commanded Elizabeth so far as to examine the meaning of every sentence . The account of Fitzwilliam connection with the Pemberley family was exactly what Fitzwilliam had related Fitzwilliam ; and the kindness of the late Fitzwilliam , though Elizabeth had not before known the kindness of the late Fitzwilliam extent , agreed equally well with Fitzwilliam own words . So far each recital confirmed the other ; but when Elizabeth came to the will , the difference was great . What George had said of the living was fresh in Elizabeth memory , and as Elizabeth recalled George very words , it was impossible not to feel that there was gross duplicity on one side or the other ; and , for a few moments , Elizabeth flattered Elizabeth that Elizabeth wishes did not err . But when Elizabeth read and re - read with the closest attention , the particulars immediately following of George ’s resigning all pretensions to the living , of George receiving in lieu so considerable a sum as three thousand pounds , again was Elizabeth forced to hesitate . Elizabeth put down the letter , weighed every circumstance with what Elizabeth meant to be impartiality — deliberated on the probability of each statement — but with little success . On both sides it was only assertion . Again Elizabeth read on ; but every line proved more clearly that the affair , which Elizabeth had believed it impossible that any contrivance could so represent as to render Fitzwilliam ’s conduct in the affair , which Elizabeth had believed it impossible that any contrivance could so represent as to render Fitzwilliam ’s conduct in less than infamous , was capable of a turn which must make Fitzwilliam entirely blameless throughout the whole . 
 
  The extravagance and general profligacy which Fitzwilliam scrupled not to lay at Charlie ’s charge , exceedingly shocked Elizabeth ; the more so , as Elizabeth could bring no proof of The extravagance and general profligacy which Fitzwilliam scrupled not to lay at Charlie ’s charge injustice . Elizabeth had never heard of Fitzwilliam before Fitzwilliam entrance into the — — shire Militia , in which Fitzwilliam had engaged at the persuasion of the young man who , on meeting Fitzwilliam accidentally in town , had there renewed a slight acquaintance . Of Fitzwilliam former way of life nothing had been known in Hertfordshire but what Fitzwilliam told Fitzwilliam . As to Fitzwilliam real character , had information been in Elizabeth power , Elizabeth had never felt a wish of enquiring . Fitzwilliam countenance , voice , and manner had established Fitzwilliam at once in the possession of every virtue . Elizabeth tried to recollect some instance of goodness , some distinguished trait of integrity or benevolence , that might rescue Fitzwilliam from the attacks of Fitzwilliam ; or at least , by the predominance of virtue , atone for those casual errors under which Elizabeth would endeavour to class what Fitzwilliam had described as the idleness and vice of many years ’ continuance . But no such recollection befriended Elizabeth . Elizabeth could see Fitzwilliam instantly before Elizabeth , in every charm of air and address ; but Elizabeth could remember no more substantial good than the general approbation of the neighbourhood , and the regard which Fitzwilliam social powers had gained Fitzwilliam in the mess . After pausing on this point a considerable while , Elizabeth once more continued to read . But , alas ! the story which followed , of Fitzwilliam designs on Georgiana , received some confirmation from what had passed between Fitzwilliam and Elizabeth only the morning before ; and at last Elizabeth was referred for the truth of every particular to Fitzwilam himself — from whom Elizabeth had previously received the information of Fitzwilliam near concern in all Fitzwilliam cousin ’s affairs , and whose character Elizabeth had no reason to question . At one time Elizabeth had almost resolved on applying to Fitzwilliam , but the idea was checked by the awkwardness of applying , and at length wholly banished by the conviction that Fitzwilliam would never have hazarded such a proposal , if Fitzwilliam had not been well assured of Fitzwilliam cousin ’s corroboration . 
 
  Elizabeth perfectly remembered everything that had passed in conversation between George and Elizabeth , in George and Elizabeth first evening at Mr. Phillips ’s . Many of George expressions were still fresh in Elizabeth memory . Elizabeth was now struck with the impropriety of such communications to a stranger , and wondered the impropriety of such communications to a stranger had escaped Elizabeth before . Elizabeth saw the indelicacy of putting Fitzwilliam forward as Fitzwilliam had done , and the inconsistency of Fitzwilliam professions with Fitzwilliam conduct . Elizabeth remembered that Fitzwilliam had boasted of having no fear of seeing Fitzwilliam — that Fitzwilliam might leave Hertfordshire , but that Fitzwilliam should stand Fitzwilliam ground ; yet Fitzwilliam had avoided the Netherfield ball the very next week . Elizabeth remembered also that , till the Pemberley family had quitted Hertfordshire , Fitzwilliam had told Fitzwilliam story to no one but Elizabeth ; but that after quitted Fitzwilliam story had been everywhere discussed ; that Fitzwilliam had then no reserves , no scruples in sinking Fitzwilliam ’s character , though Fitzwilliam had assured Elizabeth that respect for the father would always prevent Fitzwilliam exposing Fitzwilliam . 
 
  How differently did everything now appear in which Fitzwilliam was concerned ! Fitzwilliam attentions to Miss King were now the consequence of views solely and hatefully mercenary ; and the mediocrity of Elizabeth fortune proved no longer the moderation of Fitzwilliam wishes , but Fitzwilliam eagerness to grasp at anything . Fitzwilliam behaviour to Elizabeth could now have had no tolerable motive ; Fitzwilliam had either been deceived with regard to Elizabeth fortune , or had been gratifying Fitzwilliam vanity by encouraging the preference which Elizabeth believed Elizabeth had most incautiously shown . Every lingering struggle in Fitzwilliam favour grew fainter and fainter ; and in farther justification of Fitzwilliam , Elizabeth could not but allow that Fitzwilliam , when questioned by Jane , had long ago asserted Fitzwilliam blamelessness in the affair ; that proud and repulsive as were Fitzwilliam manners , Elizabeth had never , in the whole course of their acquaintance — an acquaintance which had latterly brought their much together , and given Elizabeth a sort of intimacy with Fitzwilliam ways — seen anything that betrayed Fitzwilliam to be unprincipled or unjust — anything that spoke Fitzwilliam of irreligious or immoral habits ; that among Fitzwilliam own connections Fitzwilliam was esteemed and valued — that even George had allowed Fitzwilliam merit as a brother , and that Elizabeth had often heard Fitzwilliam speak so affectionately of Fitzwilliam sister as to prove Fitzwilliam capable of some amiable feeling ; that had Fitzwilliam actions been what Charlie represented Fitzwilliam actions , so gross a violation of everything right could hardly have been concealed from the world ; and that friendship between a person capable of it , and such an amiable man as Fitzwilliam , was incomprehensible . 
 
  Elizabeth grew absolutely ashamed of Elizabeth . Of neither Fitzwilliam nor George could Elizabeth think without feeling Elizabeth had been blind , partial , prejudiced , absurd . 
 
  “ How despicably Elizabeth have acted ! ” Elizabeth cried ; “ I , who have prided Elizabeth on Elizabeth discernment ! I , who have valued Elizabeth on Elizabeth abilities ! who have often disdained the generous candour of Elizabeth sister , and gratified Elizabeth vanity in useless or blameable mistrust ! How humiliating is this discovery ! Yet , how just a humiliation ! Had Elizabeth been in love , Elizabeth could not have been more wretchedly blind ! But vanity , not love , has been Elizabeth folly . Pleased with the preference of one , and offended by the neglect of the other , on the very beginning of their acquaintance , Elizabeth have courted prepossession and ignorance , and driven reason away , where either were concerned . Till this moment Elizabeth never knew Elizabeth . ” 
 
  From Elizabeth to Jane — from Jane to Fitzwilliam , Elizabeth thoughts were in a line which soon brought to Elizabeth recollection that Fitzwilliam ’s explanation there had appeared very insufficient , and Elizabeth read Fitzwilliam account of the real , the worst objections to the match again . Widely different was the effect of a second perusal . How could Elizabeth deny that credit to Fitzwilliam assertions in one instance , which Elizabeth had been obliged to give in the other ? Fitzwilliam declared Fitzwilliam to be totally unsuspicious of Elizabeth sister ’s attachment ; and Elizabeth could not help remembering what Charlie opinion had always been . Neither could Elizabeth deny the justice of Fitzwilliam description of Jane . Elizabeth felt that Jane ’s feelings , though fervent , were little displayed , and that there was a constant complacency in Jane air and manner not often united with great sensibility . 
 
  When Elizabeth came to that part of the letter in which Elizabeth family were mentioned in terms of such mortifying , yet merited reproach , Elizabeth sense of shame was severe . The justice of the charge struck Elizabeth too forcibly for denial , and the circumstances to which Fitzwilliam particularly alluded as having passed at the Netherfield ball , and as confirming all Fitzwilliam first disapprobation , could not have made a stronger impression on Fitzwilliam mind than on Elizabeth . 
 
  The compliment to Elizabeth and Jane was not unfelt . The compliment to Elizabeth and Jane soothed , but The compliment to Elizabeth and Jane could not console Elizabeth for the contempt which had thus been self - attracted by the rest of Elizabeth family ; and as Elizabeth considered that Jane ’s disappointment had in fact been the work of Jane nearest relations , and reflected how materially the credit of Elizabeth and Jane must be hurt by such impropriety of conduct , Elizabeth felt depressed beyond anything Elizabeth had ever known before . 
 
  After wandering along the lane for two hours , giving way to every variety of thought — re - considering events , determining probabilities , and reconciling Elizabeth , as well as Elizabeth could , to a change so sudden and so important , fatigue , and a recollection of Elizabeth long absence , made Elizabeth at length return home ; and Elizabeth entered the house with the wish of appearing cheerful as usual , and the resolution of repressing such reflections as must make Elizabeth unfit for conversation . 
 
  Elizabeth was immediately told that the two gentlemen from Rosings had each called during Elizabeth absence ; Fitzwilliam , only for a few minutes , to take leave — but that Fitzwilliam had been sitting with them at least an hour , hoping for Elizabeth return , and almost resolving to walk after Elizabeth till Elizabeth could be found . Elizabeth could but just affect concern in missing Fitzwilliam ; Elizabeth really rejoiced at it . Fitzwilliam was no longer an object ; Elizabeth could think only of the letter . 
 Chapter 
 
  The two gentlemen left Rosings the next morning , and William Collins having been in waiting near the lodges , to make The two gentlemen William Collins parting obeisance , was able to bring home the pleasing intelligence , of The two gentlemen appearing in very good health , and in as tolerable spirits as could be expected , after the melancholy scene so lately gone through at Rosings . To Rosings William Collins then hastened , to console Cathleen and Cathleen daughter ; and on William Collins return brought back , with great satisfaction , a message from her ladyship , importing that her ladyship felt her ladyship so dull as to make her ladyship very desirous of having them all to dine with her ladyship . 
 
  Cathleen daughter could not see Cathleen without recollecting that , had Cathleen daughter chosen it , Cathleen daughter might by this time have been presented to Cathleen as Cathleen future niece ; nor could Cathleen daughter think , without a smile , of what her ladyship ’s indignation would have been . “ What would her ladyship have said ? how would her ladyship have behaved ? ” were questions with which Cathleen amused Cathleen . 
 
  Their first subject was the diminution of the Rosings party . “ Cathleen assure you , Cathleen feel the diminution of the Rosings party exceedingly , ” said Cathleen ; “ Cathleen believe no one feels the loss of friends so much as Cathleen do . But Cathleen am particularly attached to these young men , and know these young men to be so much attached to Cathleen ! these young men were excessively sorry to go ! But so these young men always are . The dear Colonel rallied The dear Colonel spirits tolerably till just at last ; but Fitzwilliam seemed to feel the diminution of the Rosings party most acutely , more , Cathleen think , than last year . Fitzwilliam attachment to Rosings certainly increases . ” 
 
  William Collins had a compliment , and an allusion to throw in here , which were kindly smiled on by Cathleen and Cathleen daughter . 
 
  Cathleen observed , after dinner , that Miss Bennet seemed out of spirits , and immediately accounting for seemed Cathleen , by supposing that Miss Bennet did not like to go home again so soon , Cathleen added : 
 
  “ But if that is the case , Cathleen daughter must write to Cathleen daughter mother and beg that Cathleen daughter may stay a little longer . William Collins will be very glad of Cathleen daughter company , Cathleen am sure . ” 
 
  “ Cathleen daughter am much obliged to her ladyship for her ladyship kind invitation , ” replied Cathleen daughter , “ but it is not in Cathleen daughter power to accept her ladyship kind invitation . Cathleen daughter must be in town next Saturday . ” 
 
  “ Why , at that rate , them all will have been here only six weeks . her ladyship expected them all to stay two months . her ladyship told William Collins so before them all came . There can be no occasion for them all going so soon . Cathleen daughter mother could certainly spare them all for another fortnight . ” 
 
  “ But Cathleen daughter father can not . Cathleen daughter father wrote last week to hurry Cathleen daughter return . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! Cathleen daughter father of course may spare Cathleen daughter , if Cathleen daughter mother can . Daughters are never of so much consequence to a father . And if them all will stay another month complete , it will be in her ladyship power to take one of them all as far as London , for her ladyship am going there early in June , for a week ; and as Dawson does not object to the barouche - box , there will be very good room for one of them all — and indeed , if the weather should happen to be cool , her ladyship should not object to taking them all , as them all are neither of you large . ” 
 
  “ her ladyship are all kindness , her ladyship ; but Cathleen daughter believe we must abide by we original plan . ” 
 
  Cathleen seemed resigned . “ William Collins , William Collins must send a servant with these young men . Cathleen daughter know Cathleen always speak Cathleen mind , and Cathleen can not bear the idea of these young men travelling post by these young men . travelling is highly improper . William Collins must contrive to send somebody . Cathleen have the greatest dislike in the world to that sort of thing . Young women should always be properly guarded and attended , according to Young women situation in life . When Cathleen niece Georgiana went to Ramsgate last summer , Cathleen made a point of Cathleen niece Georgiana having two men - servants go with Cathleen niece Georgiana . Cathleen niece Georgiana , could not have appeared with propriety in a different manner . Cathleen am excessively attentive to all those things . William Collins must send John with these young men , William Collins . Cathleen am glad it occurred to Cathleen to mention send ; for it would really be discreditable to William Collins to let these young men go alone . ” 
 
  “ Cathleen daughter uncle is to send a servant for us . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! Cathleen daughter uncle ! Cathleen daughter uncle keeps a man - servant , does Cathleen daughter uncle ? her ladyship am very glad them all have somebody who thinks of these things . Where shall them all change horses ? Oh ! Bromley , of course . If them all mention Cathleen name at the Bell , them all will be attended to . ” 
 
  Cathleen had many other questions to ask respecting us journey , and as Cathleen did not answer many other questions to ask respecting us journey Cathleen , attention was necessary , which Cathleen daughter believed to be lucky for Cathleen daughter ; or , with a mind so occupied , Cathleen daughter might have forgotten where Cathleen daughter was . Reflection must be reserved for solitary hours ; whenever Cathleen daughter was alone , Cathleen daughter gave way to Reflection as the greatest relief ; and not a day went by without a solitary walk , in which Cathleen daughter might indulge in all the delight of unpleasant recollections . 
 
  Fitzwilliam ’s letter Cathleen daughter was in a fair way of soon knowing by heart . Cathleen daughter studied every sentence ; and Cathleen daughter feelings towards Fitzwilliam were at times widely different . When Cathleen daughter remembered the style of Fitzwilliam address , Cathleen daughter was still full of indignation ; but when Cathleen daughter considered how unjustly Cathleen daughter had condemned and upbraided Fitzwilliam , Cathleen daughter anger was turned against Cathleen daughter ; and Fitzwilliam disappointed feelings became the object of compassion . Fitzwilliam attachment excited gratitude , Fitzwilliam general character respect ; but Cathleen daughter could not approve Fitzwilliam ; nor could Cathleen daughter for a moment repent Cathleen daughter refusal , or feel the slightest inclination ever to see Fitzwilliam again . In Cathleen daughter own past behaviour , there was a constant source of vexation and regret ; and in the unhappy defects of Cathleen daughter family , a subject of yet heavier chagrin . the unhappy defects of Cathleen daughter family were hopeless of remedy . Cathleen daughter father , contented with laughing at the unhappy defects of Cathleen daughter family , would never exert Cathleen daughter father to restrain the wild giddiness of Cathleen daughter father youngest daughters ; and Cathleen daughter mother , with manners so far from right Cathleen daughter mother , was entirely insensible of the evil . Cathleen daughter had frequently united with Jane in an endeavour to check the imprudence of Catherine and Lydia ; but while Catherine and Lydia were supported by Catherine and Lydia mother ’s indulgence , what chance could there be of improvement ? Catherine , weak - spirited , irritable , and completely under Lydia ’s guidance , had been always affronted by their advice ; and Lydia , self - willed and careless , would scarcely give Catherine and Lydia a hearing . Catherine and Lydia were ignorant , idle , and vain . While there was an officer in Meryton , Catherine and Lydia would flirt with an officer in Meryton ; and while Meryton was within a walk of Longbourn , Catherine and Lydia would be going there forever . 
 
  Anxiety on Jane ’s behalf was another prevailing concern ; and Fitzwilliam ’s explanation , by restoring Charles to all Charles former good opinion , heightened the sense of what Jane had lost . Fitzwilliam affection was proved to have been sincere , and Fitzwilliam conduct cleared of all blame , unless any could attach to the implicitness of Fitzwilliam confidence in Fitzwilliam friend . How grievous then was the thought that , of a situation so desirable in every respect , so replete with advantage , so promising for happiness , Jane had been deprived , by the folly and indecorum of Jane own family ! 
 
  When to these recollections was added the development of George ’s character , it may be easily believed that the happy spirits which had seldom been depressed before , were now so much affected as to make it almost impossible for George ’s to appear tolerably cheerful . 
 
  them all engagements at Rosings were as frequent during the last week of her ladyship stay as them all engagements at Rosings had been at first . The very last evening was spent there ; and her ladyship again enquired minutely into the particulars of them all journey , gave them all directions as to the best method of packing , and was so urgent on the necessity of placing gowns in the only right way , that Cathleen daughter thought Cathleen daughter obliged , on Cathleen daughter return , to undo all the work of the morning , and pack Cathleen daughter trunk afresh . 
 
  When them all parted , Cathleen , with great condescension , wished them all a good journey , and invited them all to come to Hunsford again next year ; and Cathleen exerted Cathleen so far as to curtsey and hold out Cathleen hand to them all . 
 Chapter 
 
  On Saturday morning Elizabeth and William Collins met for breakfast a few minutes before the others appeared ; and William Collins took the opportunity of paying the parting civilities which William Collins deemed indispensably necessary . 
 
  “ William Collins know not , Miss Elizabeth , ” said William Collins , “ whether William Collins has yet expressed William Collins sense of Elizabeth kindness in coming to William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins ; but William Collins am very certain Elizabeth will not leave the house without receiving William Collins thanks for it . The favour of Elizabeth company has been much felt , William Collins assure Elizabeth . William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins know how little there is to tempt anyone to William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins humble abode . William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins plain manner of living , William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins small rooms and few domestics , and the little William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins see of the world , must make Hunsford extremely dull to a young lady like Elizabeth ; but William Collins hope Elizabeth will believe William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins grateful for the condescension , and that William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins have done everything in William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins power to prevent Elizabeth spending Elizabeth time unpleasantly . ” 
 
  Elizabeth was eager with Elizabeth thanks and assurances of happiness . Elizabeth had spent six weeks with great enjoyment ; and the pleasure of being with Charlotte , and the kind attentions Elizabeth had received , must make Elizabeth feel the obliged . William Collins was gratified , and with a more smiling solemnity replied : 
 
  “ It gives William Collins great pleasure to hear that Elizabeth have passed Elizabeth time not disagreeably . William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins have certainly done William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins best ; and most fortunately having it in William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins power to introduce Elizabeth to very superior society , and , from William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins connection with Rosings , the frequent means of varying the humble home scene , William Collins think William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins may flatter William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins that your Hunsford visit can not have been entirely irksome . William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins situation with regard to Cathleen ’s family is indeed the sort of extraordinary advantage and blessing which few can boast . You see on what a footing William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins are . You see how continually William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins are engaged there . In truth William Collins must acknowledge that , with all the disadvantages of the house , William Collins should not think anyone abiding in the house an object of compassion , while anyone abiding in the house are sharers of William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins intimacy at Rosings . ” 
 
  Words were insufficient for the elevation of William Collins feelings ; and William Collins was obliged to walk about the room , while Elizabeth tried to unite civility and truth in a few short sentences . 
 
  “ William Collins may , in fact , carry a very favourable report of us into Hertfordshire , Elizabeth dear cousin . Elizabeth flatter Elizabeth at least that Elizabeth will be able to do so . Cathleen ’s great attentions to William Collins Elizabeth have been a daily witness of ; and altogether Elizabeth trust it does not appear that Elizabeth friend has drawn an unfortunate — but on this point it will be as well to be silent . Only let William Collins assure Elizabeth , William Collins dear Miss Elizabeth , that William Collins can from William Collins heart most cordially wish Elizabeth equal felicity in marriage . William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins have but one mind and one way of thinking . There is in everything a most remarkable resemblance of character and ideas between William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins . William Collins dear Charlotte and William Collins seem to have been designed for each other . ” 
 
  Elizabeth could safely say that it was a great happiness where seem was the case , and with equal sincerity could add , that Elizabeth firmly believed and rejoiced in Charlotte domestic comforts . Elizabeth was not sorry , however , to have the recital of Charlotte domestic comforts interrupted by William Collins . Poor Charlotte ! it was melancholy to leave Charlotte to such society ! But Charlotte had chosen it with Charlotte eyes open ; and though evidently regretting that Charlotte visitors were to go , Charlotte did not seem to ask for compassion . Charlotte home and Charlotte housekeeping , Charlotte parish and Charlotte poultry , and all Charlotte home and Charlotte housekeeping , Charlotte parish and Charlotte poultry , and all dependent concerns , had not yet lost Charlotte home and Charlotte housekeeping , Charlotte parish and Charlotte poultry , and all charms . 
 
  At length the chaise arrived , the trunks were fastened on , the parcels placed within , and it was pronounced to be ready . After an affectionate parting between the friends , Elizabeth was attended to the carriage by William Collins , and as they walked down the garden William Collins was commissioning Elizabeth with William Collins best respects to all Elizabeth family , not forgetting William Collins thanks for the kindness William Collins had received at Longbourn in the winter , and William Collins compliments to Edward and Madeline , though unknown . William Collins then handed Elizabeth in , Maria followed , and the door was on the point of being closed , when William Collins suddenly reminded they , with some consternation , that they had hitherto forgotten to leave any message for the ladies at Rosings . 
 
  “ But , ” William Collins added , “ Elizabeth will of course wish to have Elizabeth humble respects delivered to the ladies at Rosings , with Elizabeth grateful thanks for the ladies at Rosings kindness to Elizabeth while Elizabeth have been here . ” 
 
  Elizabeth made no objection ; the door was then allowed to be shut , and the carriage drove off . 
 
  “ Good gracious ! ” cried Maria , after a few minutes ’ silence , “ it seems but a day or two since they first came ! and yet how many things have happened ! ” 
 
  “ A great many indeed , ” said Elizabeth companion with a sigh . 
 
  “ they have dined nine times at Rosings , besides drinking tea there twice ! How much Elizabeth shall have to tell ! ” 
 
  Elizabeth added privately , “ And how much Elizabeth shall have to conceal ! ” 
 
  they journey was performed without much conversation , or any alarm ; and within four hours of they leaving Hunsford they reached Edward ’s house , where they were to remain a few days . 
 
  Jane looked well , and Elizabeth had little opportunity of studying Jane spirits , amidst the various engagements which the kindness of Elizabeth aunt had reserved for they . But Jane was to go home with Elizabeth , and at Longbourn there would be leisure enough for observation . 
 
  It was not without an effort , meanwhile , that Elizabeth could wait even for Longbourn , before Elizabeth told Jane of Fitzwilliam ’s proposals . To know that Elizabeth had the power of revealing what would so exceedingly astonish Jane , and must , at the same time , so highly gratify whatever of Elizabeth own vanity Elizabeth had not yet been able to reason away , was such a temptation to openness as nothing could have conquered but the state of indecision in which Elizabeth remained as to the extent of what Elizabeth should communicate ; and Elizabeth fear , if Elizabeth once entered on the subject , of being hurried into repeating something of Charlotte which might only grieve Jane further . 
 Chapter 
 
  It was the second week in May , in which the three young ladies set out together from Gracechurch Street for the town of — — , in Hertfordshire ; and , as the three young ladies drew near the appointed inn where Father ’s carriage was to meet the three young ladies , the three young ladies quickly perceived , in token of the coachman ’s punctuality , both Kitty and Lydia looking out of a dining - room up stairs . both Kitty and Lydia had been above an hour in the appointed inn where Father ’s carriage was to meet the three young ladies , happily employed in visiting an opposite milliner , watching the sentinel on guard , and dressing a salad and cucumber . 
 
  After welcoming the three young ladies , both Kitty and Lydia triumphantly displayed a table set out with such cold meat as an inn larder usually affords , exclaiming , “ Is not this nice ? Is not this an agreeable surprise ? ” 
 
  “ And both Kitty and Lydia mean to treat the three young ladies , ” added Lydia , “ but the three young ladies must lend both Kitty and Lydia the money , for both Kitty and Lydia have just spent both Kitty and Lydia at the shop out there . ” Then , showing Lydia purchases—“Look here , Lydia have bought this bonnet . Lydia do not think this bonnet is very pretty ; but Lydia thought Lydia might as well buy this bonnet as not . Lydia shall pull this bonnet to pieces as soon as Lydia get home , and see if Lydia can make this bonnet up any better . ” 
 
  And when Lydia sisters abused this bonnet as ugly , Lydia added , with perfect unconcern , “ Oh ! but there were two or three much uglier in the shop ; and when Lydia have bought some prettier - coloured satin to trim this bonnet with fresh , Lydia think it will be very tolerable . Besides , this bonnet will not much signify what one wears this summer , after the — — shire have left Meryton , and the — — shire are going in a fortnight . ” 
 
  “ Are the — — shire indeed ! ” cried Elizabeth , with the greatest satisfaction . 
 
  “ the — — shire are going to be encamped near Brighton ; and Elizabeth do so want Father ’s to take us all there for the summer ! take would be such a delicious scheme ; and Elizabeth dare say would hardly cost anything at all . Mamma would like to go too of all things ! Only think what a miserable summer else we shall have ! ” 
 
  “ Yes , ” thought Elizabeth , “ take would be a delightful scheme indeed , and completely do for us all at once . Good Heaven ! Brighton , and a whole campful of soldiers , to us , who have been overset already by one poor regiment of militia , and the monthly balls of Meryton ! ” 
 
  “ Now Lydia have got some news for the three young ladies , ” said Lydia , as the three young ladies sat down at table . “ What do the three young ladies think ? some news is excellent news — capital news — and about a certain person we all like ! ” 
 
  Jane and Elizabeth looked at each other , and the waiter was told the waiter need not stay . Lydia laughed , and said : 
 
  “ Aye , that is just like the three young ladies formality and discretion . Lydia thought the waiter must not hear , as if the waiter cared ! Lydia dare say the waiter often hears worse things said than Lydia am going to say . But the waiter is an ugly fellow ! Lydia am glad the waiter is gone . Lydia never saw such a long chin in Lydia life . Well , but now for Lydia news ; Lydia news is about a certain person we all like ; too good for the waiter , is Lydia news not ? There is no danger of a certain person we all like marrying Mary King . There ’s for the three young ladies ! Mary King is gone down to Mary King uncle at Liverpool : gone to stay . a certain person we all like is safe . ” 
 
  “ And Mary King is safe ! ” added Elizabeth ; “ safe from a connection imprudent as to fortune . ” 
 
  “ Mary King is a great fool for going away , if Mary King liked a certain person we all like . ” 
 
  “ But Jane hope there is no strong attachment on either side , ” said Jane . 
 
  “ Lydia am sure there is not on a certain person we all like . Lydia will answer for it , a certain person we all like never cared three straws about Mary King — who could about Mary King ? ” Elizabeth Elizabeth was shocked to think that , however incapable of such coarseness of expression Elizabeth , the coarseness of the sentiment was little other than Elizabeth own breast had harboured and fancied liberal ! 
 
  As soon as the three young ladies had ate , and the elder ones paid , Father ’s carriage was ordered ; and after some contrivance , the three young ladies , with all the three young ladies boxes , work - bags , and parcels , and the unwelcome addition of Kitty ’s and Lydia ’s purchases , were seated in Father ’s carriage . 
 
  “ How nicely the three young ladies are all crammed in , ” cried Lydia . “ Lydia am glad Lydia bought Lydia bonnet , if bought is only for the fun of having another bandbox ! Well , now let the three young ladies be quite comfortable and snug , and talk and laugh all the way home . And in the first place , let the three young ladies hear what has happened to the three young ladies since the three young ladies went away . Have the three young ladies seen any pleasant men ? Have the three young ladies had any flirting ? Lydia was in great hopes that one of the three young ladies would have got a husband before the three young ladies came back . Jane will be quite an old maid soon , Lydia declare . Jane is almost three - and - twenty ! Lord , how ashamed Elizabeth should be of not being married before three - and - twenty ! Elizabeth aunt Phillips wants the three young ladies so to get husbands , the three young ladies ca n’t think . Elizabeth aunt Phillips says Elizabeth had better have taken William Collins ; but Elizabeth do not think there would have been any fun in taken . Lord ! how Elizabeth should like to be married before any of the three young ladies ; and then Elizabeth would chaperon the three young ladies about to all the balls . Dear Elizabeth ! Kitty and Elizabeth had such a good piece of fun the other day at Colonel Forster ’s . Kitty and Elizabeth were to spend the day there , and Colonel Forster ’s promised to have a little dance in the evening ; ( by the bye , Mrs. Forster and Elizabeth are such friends ! ) and so Colonel Forster ’s asked the two Harringtons to come , but Harriet was ill , and so Pen was forced to come by Pen ; and then , what do the three young ladies think Kitty and Elizabeth did ? Kitty and Elizabeth dressed up Chamberlayne in woman ’s clothes on purpose to pass for a lady , only think what fun ! Not a soul knew of dressed , but Colonel Forster ’s and Colonel Forster ’s , and Kitty and Elizabeth , except Elizabeth aunt , for Kitty and Elizabeth were forced to borrow one of Elizabeth aunt gowns ; and you can not imagine how well Chamberlayne looked ! When Denny , and a certain person we all like , and Pratt , and two or three more of the men came in , Denny , and a certain person we all like , and Pratt , and two or three more of the men did not know Chamberlayne in the least . Lord ! how Elizabeth laughed ! and so did Elizabeth aunt . Elizabeth thought Elizabeth should have died . And that made the men suspect something , and then the men soon found out what was the matter . ” 
 
  With such kinds of histories of their parties and good jokes , did Lydia , assisted by Kitty ’s hints and additions , endeavour to amuse Lydia companions all the way to Longbourn . Elizabeth listened as little as Elizabeth could , but there was no escaping the frequent mention of a certain person we all like name . 
 
  the three young ladies reception at home was most kind . Mother rejoiced to see Jane in undiminished beauty ; and more than once during dinner did Father ’s say voluntarily to Elizabeth : 
 
  “ Mother am glad Elizabeth are come back , Elizabeth . ” 
 
  the three young ladies party in the dining - room was large , for almost all the Lucases came to meet Maria and hear the news ; and various were the subjects that occupied the three young ladies : Lady Lucas was enquiring of Maria , after the welfare and poultry of Lady Lucas eldest daughter ; Mother was doubly engaged , on one hand collecting an account of the present fashions from Jane , who sat some way below Mother , and , on the other , retailing them all to the younger Lucases ; and Lydia , in a voice rather louder than any other person ’s , was enumerating the various pleasures of the morning to anybody who would hear Lydia . 
 
  “ Oh ! Mary , ” said Lydia , “ Lydia wish Mary had gone with Kitty and Elizabeth , for Kitty and Elizabeth had such fun ! As Kitty and Elizabeth went along , Kitty and Elizabeth drew up the blinds , and pretended there was nobody in Father ’s carriage ; and Lydia should have gone so all the way , if Kitty had not been sick ; and when Kitty and Elizabeth got to a certain person we all like , Lydia do think Kitty and Elizabeth behaved very handsomely , for Kitty and Elizabeth treated the other three with the nicest cold luncheon in the world , and if Mary would have gone , Kitty and Elizabeth would have treated Mary too . And then when Kitty and Elizabeth came away it was such fun ! Lydia thought Kitty and Elizabeth never should have got into Father ’s carriage . Lydia was ready to die of laughter . And then Kitty and Elizabeth were so merry all the way home ! Kitty and Elizabeth talked and laughed so loud , that anybody might have heard Kitty and Elizabeth ten miles off ! ” 
 
  To this Mary very gravely replied , “ Far be it from Mary , Mary dear sister , to depreciate such pleasures ! such pleasures would doubtless be congenial with the generality of female minds . But Mary confess such pleasures would have no charms for Mary — Mary should infinitely prefer a book . ” 
 
  But of this answer Lydia heard not a word . Lydia seldom listened to anybody for more than half a minute , and never attended to Mary at all . 
 
  In the afternoon Lydia was urgent with the rest of the three young ladies to walk to Meryton , and to see how everybody went on ; but Elizabeth steadily opposed the scheme . It should not be said that the Miss Bennets could not be at home half a day before the Miss Bennets were in pursuit of the officers . There was another reason too for Elizabeth opposition . Elizabeth dreaded seeing Charlie again , and was resolved to avoid seeing as long as possible . The comfort to Elizabeth of the officers approaching removal was indeed beyond expression . In a fortnight the three young ladies were to go — and once gone , Elizabeth hoped there could be nothing more to plague Elizabeth on Charlie account . 
 
  Elizabeth had not been many hours at home before Elizabeth found that the Brighton scheme , of which Lydia had given them a hint at the appointed inn where Father ’s carriage was to meet the three young ladies , was under frequent discussion between Elizabeth parents . Elizabeth saw directly that Father ’s had not the smallest intention of yielding ; but Father ’s answers were at the same time so vague and equivocal , that Elizabeth mother , though often disheartened , had never yet despaired of succeeding at last . 
 Chapter 
 
  Elizabeth ’s impatience to acquaint Jane with what had happened could no longer be overcome ; and at length , resolving to suppress every particular in which Jane was concerned , and preparing Jane to be surprised , Elizabeth ’s related to Jane the next morning the chief of the scene between Fitzwilliam and Elizabeth ’s . 
 
  Jane astonishment was soon lessened by the strong sisterly partiality which made any admiration of Elizabeth ’s appear perfectly natural ; and all surprise was shortly lost in other feelings . Jane was sorry that Fitzwilliam should have delivered Fitzwilliam sentiments in a manner so little suited to recommend Fitzwilliam sentiments ; but still more was Jane grieved for the unhappiness which Elizabeth ’s refusal must have given Fitzwilliam . 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam being so sure of succeeding was wrong , ” said Jane , “ and certainly ought not to have appeared ; but consider how much Fitzwilliam being so sure of succeeding must increase Fitzwilliam disappointment ! ” 
 
  “ Indeed , ” replied Elizabeth ’s , “ Elizabeth ’s am heartily sorry for Fitzwilliam ; but Fitzwilliam has other feelings , which will probably soon drive away Fitzwilliam regard for Elizabeth ’s . Jane do not blame Elizabeth ’s , however , for refusing Fitzwilliam ? ” 
 
  “ Blame Elizabeth ’s ! Oh , no . ” 
 
  “ But Elizabeth ’s blame Elizabeth ’s for having spoken so warmly of George ? ” 
 
  “ No — Elizabeth ’s do not know that Elizabeth ’s were wrong in saying what Elizabeth ’s did . ” 
 
  “ But Jane will know it , when Elizabeth ’s tell Jane what happened the very next day . ” 
 
  Elizabeth ’s then spoke of the letter , repeating the whole of the letter contents as far as the letter contents concerned George . What a stroke was this for poor Jane ! who would willingly have gone through the world without believing that so much wickedness existed in the whole race of mankind , as was here collected in George . Nor was Fitzwilliam ’s vindication , though grateful to Jane feelings , capable of consoling Jane for such discovery . Most earnestly did Jane labour to prove the probability of error , and seek to clear the one without involving the other . 
 
  “ This will not do , ” said Elizabeth ’s ; “ Jane never will be able to make both of them good for anything . Take Jane choice , but Jane must be satisfied with only one . There is but such a quantity of merit between both of them ; just enough to make one good sort of man ; and of late it has been shifting about pretty much . For Elizabeth ’s part , Elizabeth ’s am inclined to believe it all Fitzwilliam ’s ; but Jane shall do as Jane choose . ” 
 
  It was some time , however , before a smile could be extorted from Jane . 
 
  “ Jane do not know when Jane have been more shocked , ” said Jane . “ George so very bad ! It is almost past belief . And poor Fitzwilliam ! Elizabeth ’s , only consider what Fitzwilliam must have suffered . Such a disappointment ! and with the knowledge of Elizabeth ’s ill opinion , too ! and having to relate such a thing of Fitzwilliam sister ! It is really too distressing . Elizabeth ’s am sure Elizabeth ’s must feel it so . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! no , Elizabeth ’s regret and compassion are all done away by seeing Elizabeth ’s so full of both . Elizabeth ’s know Elizabeth ’s will do Fitzwilliam such ample justice , that Elizabeth ’s am growing every moment more unconcerned and indifferent . Elizabeth ’s profusion makes Elizabeth ’s saving ; and if Elizabeth ’s lament over Fitzwilliam much longer , Elizabeth ’s heart will be as light as a feather . ” 
 
  “ Poor George ! there is such an expression of goodness in George countenance ! such an openness and gentleness in George manner ! ” 
 
  “ There certainly was some great mismanagement in the education of those two young men . One has got all the goodness , and the other all the appearance of all the goodness . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth ’s never thought Fitzwilliam so deficient in the appearance of it as Elizabeth ’s used to do . ” 
 
  “ And yet Elizabeth ’s meant to be uncommonly clever in taking so decided a dislike to Fitzwilliam , without any reason . It is such a spur to one ’s genius , such an opening for wit , to have a dislike of that kind . One may be continually abusive without saying anything just ; but one can not always be laughing at a man without now and then stumbling on something witty . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth ’s , when Elizabeth ’s first read the letter , Elizabeth ’s am sure Elizabeth ’s could not treat the matter as Elizabeth ’s do now . ” 
 
  “ Indeed , Elizabeth ’s could not . Elizabeth ’s was uncomfortable enough , Elizabeth ’s may say unhappy . And with no one to speak to about what Elizabeth ’s felt , no Jane to comfort Elizabeth ’s and say that Elizabeth ’s had not been so very weak and vain and nonsensical as Elizabeth ’s knew Elizabeth ’s had ! Oh ! how Elizabeth ’s wanted Elizabeth ’s ! ” 
 
  “ How unfortunate that Elizabeth ’s should have used such very strong expressions in speaking of George to Fitzwilliam , for now such very strong expressions do appear wholly undeserved . ” 
 
  “ Certainly . But the misfortune of speaking with bitterness is a most natural consequence of the prejudices Elizabeth ’s had been encouraging . There is one point on which Elizabeth ’s want Jane advice . Elizabeth ’s want to be told whether Elizabeth ’s ought , or ought not , to make our acquaintances in general understand George ’s character . ” Jane Jane paused a little , and then replied , “ Surely there can be no occasion for exposing George so dreadfully . What is Jane opinion ? ” 
 
  “ That exposing ought not to be attempted . Fitzwilliam has not authorised Jane to make Fitzwilliam communication public . On the contrary , every particular relative to Fitzwilliam sister was meant to be kept as much as possible to Jane ; and if Jane endeavour to undeceive people as to the rest of Fitzwilliam conduct , who will believe Jane ? The general prejudice against Fitzwilliam is so violent , that it would be the death of half the good people in Meryton to attempt to place Fitzwilliam in an amiable light . Jane am not equal to it . George will soon be gone ; and therefore it will not signify to anyone here what George really is . Some time hence it will be all found out , and then we may laugh at their stupidity in not knowing it before . At present Jane will say nothing about it . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth ’s are quite right . To have George errors made public might ruin George for ever . George is now , perhaps , sorry for what George has done , and anxious to re - establish a character . We must not make George desperate . ” 
 
  The tumult of Elizabeth ’s mind was allayed by this conversation . Elizabeth ’s had got rid of two of the secrets which had weighed on Elizabeth ’s for a fortnight , and was certain of a willing listener in Jane , whenever Elizabeth ’s might wish to talk again of either . But there was still something lurking behind , of which prudence forbade the disclosure . Elizabeth ’s dared not relate the other half of the letter , nor explain to Jane how sincerely Elizabeth ’s had been valued by Fitzwilliam . Here was knowledge in which no one could partake ; and Elizabeth ’s was sensible that nothing less than a perfect understanding between the parties could justify Elizabeth ’s in throwing off this last encumbrance of mystery . “ And then , ” said Elizabeth ’s , “ if that very improbable event should ever take place , Elizabeth ’s shall merely be able to tell what Charles may tell in a much more agreeable manner Charles . The liberty of communication can not be Elizabeth ’s till The liberty of communication has lost all The liberty of communication value ! ” 
 
  Elizabeth ’s was now , on being settled at home , at leisure to observe the real state of Jane spirits . Jane was not happy . Jane still cherished a very tender affection for Charles . Having never even fancied Jane in love before , Jane regard had all the warmth of first attachment , and , from Jane age and disposition , greater steadiness than most first attachments often boast ; and so fervently did Jane value Charles remembrance , and prefer Charles to every other man , that all Jane good sense , and all Jane attention to the feelings of Jane friends , were requisite to check the indulgence of those regrets which must have been injurious to Jane own health and Jane friends tranquillity . 
 
  “ Well , Elizabeth ’s , ” said prudence one day , “ what is Elizabeth ’s opinion now of this sad business of Jane ’s ? For prudence part , prudence am determined never to speak of this sad business of Jane ’s again to anybody . prudence told prudence sister Phillips so the other day . But prudence can not find out that Jane saw anything of Charles in London . Well , Charles is a very undeserving young man — and prudence do not suppose there ’s the least chance in the world of Jane ever getting Charles now . There is no talk of Charles coming to Netherfield again in the summer ; and prudence have enquired of everybody , too , who is likely to know . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth ’s do not believe Charles will ever live at Netherfield any more . ” 
 
  “ Oh well ! it is just as Charles chooses . Nobody wants Charles to come . Though prudence shall always say Charles used Jane extremely ill ; and if prudence was Jane , prudence would not have put up with used . Well , Elizabeth ’s comfort is , Elizabeth ’s am sure Jane will die of a broken heart ; and then Charles will be sorry for what Charles has done . ” 
 
  But as Elizabeth ’s could not receive comfort from any such expectation , Elizabeth ’s made no answer . 
 
  “ Well , Elizabeth ’s , ” continued Elizabeth ’s mother , soon afterwards , “ and so the Collinses live very comfortable , do the Collinses ? Well , well , Elizabeth ’s only hope it will last . And what sort of table do the Collinses keep ? Charlotte is an excellent manager , Elizabeth ’s dare say . If Charlotte is half as sharp as Charlotte mother , Charlotte is saving enough . There is nothing extravagant in the Collinses housekeeping , Elizabeth ’s dare say . ” 
 
  “ No , nothing at all . ” 
 
  “ A great deal of good management , depend upon nothing extravagant in the Collinses housekeeping . Yes , yes . the Collinses will take care not to outrun the Collinses income . the Collinses will never be distressed for money . Well , much good may it do the Collinses ! And so , Elizabeth ’s suppose , the Collinses often talk of having Longbourn when Elizabeth ’s father is dead . the Collinses look upon Longbourn as quite the Collinses own , Elizabeth ’s dare say , whenever that happens . ” 
 
  “ It was a subject which the Collinses could not mention before Elizabeth ’s . ” 
 
  “ No ; it would have been strange if the Collinses had ; but Elizabeth ’s make no doubt the Collinses often talk of it between the Collinses . Well , if the Collinses can be easy with an estate that is not lawfully the Collinses own , so much the better . Elizabeth ’s should be ashamed of having one that was only entailed on Elizabeth ’s . ” 
 Chapter 
 
  The first week of the regiment ’s return was soon gone . The second began . The second was the last of the regiment ’s stay in Meryton , and all the young ladies in the neighbourhood were drooping apace . The dejection was almost universal . The elder Miss Bennets alone were still able to eat , drink , and sleep , and pursue the usual course of The elder Miss Bennets alone employments . Very frequently were The elder Miss Bennets alone reproached for this insensibility by Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family . 
 
  “ Good Heaven ! what is to become of Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family ? What are Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family to do ? ” would Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family often exclaim in the bitterness of woe . “ How can Elizabeth be smiling so , Elizabeth ? ” 
 
  Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother shared all Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family grief ; Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother remembered what Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother had Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother endured on a similar occasion , five - and - twenty years ago . 
 
  “ Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother am sure , ” said Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother , “ Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother cried for two days together when Colonel Miller ’s regiment went away . Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother thought Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother should have broken Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother heart . ” 
 
  “ Lydia am sure Lydia shall break Lydia , ” said Lydia . 
 
  “ If one could but go to Brighton ! ” observed Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother . 
 
  “ Oh , yes!—if one could but go to Brighton ! But papa is so disagreeable . ” 
 
  “ A little sea - bathing would set me up forever . ” 
 
  “ And me aunt Phillips is sure A little sea - bathing would do me a great deal of good , ” added Kitty . 
 
  Such were the kind of lamentations resounding perpetually through Longbourn House . Elizabeth tried to be diverted by the kind of lamentations resounding perpetually through Longbourn House ; but all sense of pleasure was lost in shame . Elizabeth felt anew the justice of Fitzwilliam ’s objections ; and never had Elizabeth been so much disposed to pardon Fitzwilliam ’s interference in the views of Fitzwilliam ’s friend . 
 
  But the gloom of Lydia ’s prospect was shortly cleared away ; for Lydia received an invitation from Mrs. Forster , the wife of the colonel of the regiment ’s , to accompany Lydia to Brighton . Lydia was a very young woman , and very lately married . A resemblance in good humour and good spirits had recommended Lydia and Lydia to each other , and out of Lydia and Lydia three months ’ acquaintance Lydia and Lydia had been intimate two . 
 
  The rapture of Lydia on this occasion , Lydia adoration of Lydia , the delight of Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother , and the mortification of Kitty , are scarcely to be described . Wholly inattentive to Lydia sister ’s feelings , Lydia flew about Longbourn House in restless ecstasy , calling for everyone ’s congratulations , and laughing and talking with more violence than ever ; whilst the luckless Kitty continued in the parlour repining at Kitty fate in terms as unreasonable as Kitty accent was peevish . 
 
  “ Lydia can not see why Lydia should not ask Lydia as well as Lydia , ” said Lydia , “ Though Lydia am not Lydia particular friend . Lydia have just as much right to be asked as Lydia has , and more too , for Lydia am two years older . ” 
 
  In vain did Elizabeth attempt to make Lydia reasonable , and Jane to make Lydia resigned . As for Elizabeth herself , this invitation was so far from exciting in Elizabeth the same feelings as in Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother and Lydia , that Elizabeth considered this invitation as the death warrant of all possibility of common sense for Lydia ; and detestable as such a step must make Elizabeth were it known , Elizabeth could not help secretly advising Elizabeth father not to let Elizabeth go . Elizabeth represented to Elizabeth father all the improprieties of Lydia ’s general behaviour , the little advantage Lydia could derive from the friendship of such a woman as Lydia , and the probability of Lydia being yet more imprudent with such a companion at Brighton , where the temptations must be greater than at home . Elizabeth father heard Elizabeth attentively , and then said : 
 
  “ Lydia will never be easy until Lydia has exposed Lydia in some public place or other , and we can never expect Lydia to do exposed with so little expense or inconvenience to Lydia family as under the present circumstances . ” 
 
  “ If Elizabeth father were aware , ” said Elizabeth , “ of the very great disadvantage to us all which must arise from the public notice of Lydia ’s unguarded and imprudent manner — nay , which has already arisen from it , Elizabeth am sure Elizabeth father would judge differently in the affair . ” 
 
  “ Already arisen ? ” repeated Elizabeth father . “ What , has Lydia frightened away some of Elizabeth lovers ? Poor little Elizabeth ! But do not be cast down . Such squeamish youths as can not bear to be connected with a little absurdity are not worth a regret . Come , let Elizabeth father see the list of pitiful fellows who have been kept aloof by Lydia ’s folly . ” 
 
  “ Indeed Elizabeth are mistaken . Elizabeth father have no such injuries to resent . It is not of particular , but of general evils , which Elizabeth father am now complaining . Our importance , our respectability in the world must be affected by the wild volatility , the assurance and disdain of all restraint which mark Lydia ’s character . Excuse Elizabeth , for Elizabeth must speak plainly . If Elizabeth father , Elizabeth father , will not take the trouble of checking Lydia exuberant spirits , and of teaching Lydia that Lydia present pursuits are not to be the business of Lydia life , Lydia will soon be beyond the reach of amendment . Lydia character will be fixed , and Lydia will , at sixteen , be the most determined flirt that ever made Lydia or Lydia family ridiculous ; a flirt , too , in the worst and meanest degree of flirtation ; without any attraction beyond youth and a tolerable person ; and , from the ignorance and emptiness of Lydia mind , wholly unable to ward off any portion of that universal contempt which Lydia rage for admiration will excite . In this danger Kitty also is comprehended . Kitty will follow wherever Lydia leads . Lydia Oh ! Elizabeth dear father , can Elizabeth father suppose it possible that they will not be censured and despised wherever they are known , and that they sisters will not be often involved in the disgrace ? ” 
 
  Elizabeth father saw that Elizabeth whole heart was in the subject , and affectionately taking Elizabeth hand said in reply : 
 
  “ Do not make Elizabeth uneasy , Elizabeth . Wherever Elizabeth and Jane are known Elizabeth must be respected and valued ; and Elizabeth will not appear to less advantage for having a couple of — or Elizabeth father may say , three — very silly sisters . We shall have no peace at Longbourn House if Lydia does not go to Brighton . Let Lydia go , then . the colonel of the regiment ’s is a sensible man , and will keep Lydia out of any real mischief ; and Lydia is luckily too poor to be an object of prey to anybody . At Brighton Lydia will be of less importance even as a common flirt than Lydia has been here . The officers will find women better worth The officers notice . Let Our hope , therefore , that Lydia being there may teach Lydia Lydia own insignificance . At any rate , Lydia can not grow many degrees worse , without authorising Our to lock Lydia up for the rest of Lydia life . ” 
 
  With this answer Elizabeth was forced to be content ; but Elizabeth own opinion continued the same , and Elizabeth left Elizabeth father disappointed and sorry . It was not in Elizabeth nature , however , to increase Elizabeth vexations by dwelling on Elizabeth vexations . Elizabeth was confident of having performed Elizabeth duty , and to fret over unavoidable evils , or augment unavoidable evils by anxiety , was no part of Elizabeth disposition . 
 
  Had Lydia and Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother known the substance of Lydia conference with Lydia father , Lydia and Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother indignation would hardly have found expression in Lydia and Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother united volubility . In Lydia ’s imagination , a visit to Brighton comprised every possibility of earthly happiness . Lydia saw , with the creative eye of fancy , the streets of that gay bathing - place covered with officers . Lydia saw Lydia the object of attention , to tens and to scores of them at present unknown . Lydia saw all the glories of the camp — the camp tents stretched forth in beauteous uniformity of lines , crowded with the young and the gay , and dazzling with scarlet ; and , to complete the view , Lydia saw Lydia seated beneath a tent , tenderly flirting with at least six officers at once . 
 
  Had Lydia known Lydia sister sought to tear Lydia from such prospects and such realities as these , what would have been Lydia sensations ? Lydia sensations could have been understood only by Lydia mother , who might have felt nearly the same . Lydia ’s going to Brighton was all that consoled Lydia for Lydia melancholy conviction of Lydia husband ’s never intending to go there Lydia husband ’s . 
 
  But Lydia and Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother were entirely ignorant of what had passed ; and Lydia and Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother raptures continued , with little intermission , to the very day of Lydia ’s leaving home . 
 
  Elizabeth was now to see Charlie for the last time . Having been frequently in company with Charlie since Elizabeth return , agitation was pretty well over ; the agitations of former partiality entirely so . Elizabeth had even learnt to detect , in the very gentleness which had first delighted Elizabeth , an affectation and a sameness to disgust and weary . In Charlie present behaviour to Elizabeth , moreover , Elizabeth had a fresh source of displeasure , for the inclination Charlie soon testified of renewing those intentions which had marked the early part of their acquaintance could only serve , after what had since passed , to provoke Elizabeth . Elizabeth lost all concern for Charlie in finding Elizabeth thus selected as the object of such idle and frivolous gallantry ; and while Elizabeth steadily repressed such idle and frivolous gallantry , could not but feel the reproof contained in Charlie believing , that however long , and for whatever cause , Charlie attentions had been withdrawn , Elizabeth vanity would be gratified , and Elizabeth preference secured at any time by Charlie attentions renewal . 
 
  On the very last day of the regiment ’s remaining at Meryton , Charlie dined , with others of the officers , at Longbourn House ; and so little was Elizabeth disposed to part from Charlie in good humour , that on Charlie making some enquiry as to the manner in which Elizabeth time had passed at Hunsford , Elizabeth mentioned Fitzwilam ’s and Fitzwilliam ’s having both spent three weeks at Rosings , and asked Charlie , if Charlie was acquainted with Fitzwilliam ’s . 
 
  Charlie looked surprised , displeased , alarmed ; but with a moment ’s recollection and a returning smile , replied , that Charlie had formerly seen Fitzwilliam ’s often ; and , after observing that Fitzwilliam ’s was a very gentlemanlike man , asked Elizabeth how Elizabeth had liked Fitzwilliam ’s . Elizabeth answer was warmly in Fitzwilliam ’s favour . With an air of indifference Charlie soon afterwards added : 
 
  “ How long did Elizabeth say Fitzwilliam ’s was at Rosings ? ” 
 
  “ Nearly three weeks . ” 
 
  “ And Elizabeth saw Fitzwilliam ’s frequently ? ” 
 
  “ Yes , almost every day . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam ’s manners are very different from Fitzwilliam ’s cousin ’s . ” 
 
  “ Yes , very different . But Elizabeth think Fitzwilliam ’s improves upon acquaintance . ” 
 
  “ Indeed ! ” cried Charlie with a look which did not escape Charlie . “ And pray , may Charlie ask ? — ” But checking Charlie , Charlie added , in a gayer tone , “ Is it in address that Fitzwilliam ’s improves ? Has Fitzwilliam ’s deigned to add aught of civility to Fitzwilliam ’s ordinary style?—for Charlie dare not hope , ” Charlie continued in a lower and more serious tone , “ that Fitzwilliam ’s is improved in essentials . ” 
 
  “ Oh , no ! ” said Elizabeth . “ In essentials , Elizabeth believe , Fitzwilliam ’s is very much what Fitzwilliam ’s ever was . ” 
 
  While Elizabeth spoke , Charlie looked as if scarcely knowing whether to rejoice over Elizabeth words , or to distrust Elizabeth words meaning . There was a something in Elizabeth countenance which made Charlie listen with an apprehensive and anxious attention , while Elizabeth added : 
 
  “ When Elizabeth said that Fitzwilliam ’s improved on acquaintance , Elizabeth did not mean that Fitzwilliam ’s mind or Fitzwilliam ’s manners were in a state of improvement , but that , from knowing Fitzwilliam ’s better , Fitzwilliam ’s disposition was better understood . ” 
 
  Charlie alarm now appeared in a heightened complexion and agitated look ; for a few minutes Charlie was silent , till , shaking off Charlie embarrassment , Charlie turned to Elizabeth again , and said in the gentlest of accents : 
 
  “ Elizabeth , will readily comprehend how sincerely Charlie must rejoice that Fitzwilliam ’s is wise enough to assume even the appearance of what is right . Fitzwilliam ’s pride , in that direction , may be of service , if not to Fitzwilliam ’s , to many others , for Fitzwilliam ’s pride must only deter Fitzwilliam ’s from such foul misconduct as Charlie have suffered by . Charlie only fear that the sort of cautiousness to which Elizabeth , Charlie imagine , have been alluding , is merely adopted on Fitzwilliam ’s visits to Fitzwilliam ’s aunt , of whose good opinion and judgement Fitzwilliam ’s stands much in awe . Fitzwilliam ’s fear of Fitzwilliam ’s aunt , of whose good opinion and judgement Fitzwilliam ’s stands much in awe has always operated , Charlie know , when they were together ; and a good deal is to be imputed to Fitzwilliam ’s wish of forwarding the match with Cathleen , which Charlie am certain Fitzwilliam ’s has very much at heart . ” 
 
  Elizabeth could not repress a smile at this , but Elizabeth answered only by a slight inclination of the head . Elizabeth saw that Charlie wanted to engage Elizabeth on the old subject of Charlie grievances , and Elizabeth was in no humour to indulge Charlie . The rest of the evening passed with the appearance , on Charlie side , of usual cheerfulness , but with no further attempt to distinguish Elizabeth ; and Lydia and Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother parted at last with mutual civility , and possibly a mutual desire of never meeting again . 
 
  When the party broke up , Lydia returned with Lydia to Meryton , from whence they were to set out early the next morning . The separation between Lydia and Lydia family was rather noisy than pathetic . Kitty was the only one who shed tears ; but Kitty did weep from vexation and envy . Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother was diffuse in Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother good wishes for the felicity of Lydia , and impressive in Kitty and Lydia , whose own misery was extreme , and who could not comprehend such hard - heartedness in any of the family affectionate mother injunctions that Lydia should not miss the opportunity of enjoying Lydia as much as possible — advice which there was every reason to believe would be well attended to ; and in the clamorous happiness of Lydia herself in bidding farewell , the more gentle adieus of Lydia sisters were uttered without being heard . 
 Chapter 
 
  Had Elizabeth ’s opinion been all drawn from Elizabeth ’s own family , Elizabeth ’s could not have formed a very pleasing opinion of conjugal felicity or domestic comfort . Elizabeth ’s father , captivated by youth and beauty , and that appearance of good humour which youth and beauty generally give , had married a woman whose weak understanding and illiberal mind had very early in their marriage put an end to all real affection for a woman whose weak understanding and illiberal mind had very early in their marriage put an end to all real affection for . Respect , esteem , and confidence had vanished for ever ; and all Elizabeth ’s father views of domestic happiness were overthrown . But Elizabeth ’s father was not of a disposition to seek comfort for the disappointment which Elizabeth ’s father own imprudence had brought on , in any of those pleasures which too often console the unfortunate for the unfortunate folly or the unfortunate vice . Elizabeth ’s father was fond of the country and of books ; and from these tastes had arisen Elizabeth ’s father principal enjoyments . To Elizabeth ’s father wife Elizabeth ’s father was very little otherwise indebted , than as Elizabeth ’s father wife ignorance and folly had contributed to Elizabeth ’s father amusement . This is not the sort of happiness which a man would in general wish to owe to a man wife ; but where other powers of entertainment are wanting , the true philosopher will derive benefit from such as are given . 
 
  Elizabeth ’s , however , had never been blind to the impropriety of Elizabeth ’s father ’s behaviour as a husband . Elizabeth ’s had always seen Elizabeth ’s father ’s behaviour as a husband with pain ; but respecting Elizabeth ’s father abilities , and grateful for Elizabeth ’s father affectionate treatment of Elizabeth ’s , Elizabeth ’s endeavoured to forget what Elizabeth ’s could not overlook , and to banish from Elizabeth ’s thoughts that continual breach of conjugal obligation and decorum which , in exposing Elizabeth ’s father wife to the contempt of Elizabeth ’s father wife own children , was so highly reprehensible . But Elizabeth ’s had never felt so strongly as now the disadvantages which must attend the children of so unsuitable a marriage , nor ever been so fully aware of the evils arising from so ill - judged a direction of talents ; talents , which , rightly used , might at least have preserved the respectability of Elizabeth ’s father daughters , even if incapable of enlarging the mind of Elizabeth ’s father wife . 
 
  When Elizabeth ’s had rejoiced over George ’s departure Elizabeth ’s found little other cause for satisfaction in the loss of the regiment . Their parties abroad were less varied than before , and at home Elizabeth ’s had a mother and sister whose constant repinings at the dullness of everything around a mother and sister whose constant repinings at the dullness of everything around threw a real gloom over a mother and sister whose constant repinings at the dullness of everything around domestic circle ; and , though Kitty might in time regain Kitty natural degree of sense , since the disturbers of Elizabeth ’s brain were removed , Elizabeth ’s other sister , from whose disposition greater evil might be apprehended , was likely to be hardened in all Elizabeth ’s other sister , from whose disposition greater evil might be apprehended folly and assurance by a situation of such double danger as a watering - place and a camp . Upon the whole , therefore , Elizabeth ’s found , what has been sometimes found before , that an event to which Elizabeth ’s had looked forward with impatient desire did not , in taking place , bring all the satisfaction Elizabeth ’s had promised Elizabeth ’s . It was consequently necessary to name some other period for the commencement of actual felicity — to have some other point on which Elizabeth ’s wishes and hopes might be fixed , and by again enjoying the pleasure of anticipation , console Elizabeth ’s for the present , and prepare for another disappointment . Elizabeth ’s tour to the Lakes was now the object of Elizabeth ’s happiest thoughts ; Elizabeth ’s tour to the Lakes was Elizabeth ’s best consolation for all the uncomfortable hours which the discontentedness of Elizabeth ’s mother and Kitty made inevitable ; and could Elizabeth ’s have included Kitty in the scheme , every part of the scheme would have been perfect . 
 
  “ But it is fortunate , ” thought Elizabeth ’s , “ that Elizabeth ’s have something to wish for . Were the whole arrangement complete , Elizabeth ’s disappointment would be certain . But here , by carrying with Elizabeth ’s one ceaseless source of regret in Elizabeth ’s sister ’s absence , Elizabeth ’s may reasonably hope to have all Elizabeth ’s expectations of pleasure realised . A scheme of which every part promises delight can never be successful ; and general disappointment is only warded off by the defence of some little peculiar vexation . ” 
 
  When Elizabeth ’s went away Elizabeth ’s promised to write very often and very minutely to Elizabeth ’s father wife and Kitty ; but Elizabeth ’s letters were always long expected , and always very short . Those to Elizabeth ’s father wife contained little else than that they were just returned from the library , where such and such officers had attended they , and where Elizabeth ’s had seen such beautiful ornaments as made Elizabeth ’s quite wild ; that Elizabeth ’s had a new gown , or a new parasol , which Elizabeth ’s would have described more fully , but was obliged to leave off in a violent hurry , as Mrs. Forster called Elizabeth ’s , and they were going off to the camp ; and from Elizabeth ’s correspondence with Elizabeth ’s sister , there was still less to be learnt — for Elizabeth ’s letters to Kitty , though rather longer , were much too full of lines under the words to be made public . 
 
  After the first fortnight or three weeks of Elizabeth ’s absence , health , good humour , and cheerfulness began to reappear at Longbourn . Everything wore a happier aspect . The families who had been in town for the winter came back again , and summer finery and summer engagements arose . Elizabeth ’s father wife was restored to Elizabeth ’s father wife usual querulous serenity ; and , by the middle of June , Kitty was so much recovered as to be able to enter Meryton without tears ; an event of such happy promise as to make Elizabeth ’s hope that by the following Christmas Elizabeth ’s might be so tolerably reasonable as not to mention an officer above once a day , unless , by some cruel and malicious arrangement at the War Office , another regiment should be quartered in Meryton . 
 
  The time fixed for the beginning of Edward and Madeline northern tour was now fast approaching , and a fortnight only was wanting of The time fixed for the beginning of Edward and Madeline northern tour , when a letter arrived from Madeline , which at once delayed Edward and Madeline northern tour commencement and curtailed Edward and Madeline northern tour extent . Edward would be prevented by business from setting out till a fortnight later in July , and must be in London again within a month , and as that left too short a period for Edward and Madeline to go so far , and see so much as Edward and Madeline had proposed , or at least to see it with the leisure and comfort Edward and Madeline had built on , Edward and Madeline were obliged to give up the Lakes , and substitute a more contracted tour , and , according to the present plan , were to go no farther northwards than Derbyshire . In Derbyshire there was enough to be seen to occupy the chief of Edward and Madeline three weeks ; and to Madeline Madeline had a peculiarly strong attraction . Madeline , was probably as great an object of Elizabeth ’s curiosity as all the celebrated beauties of Matlock , Chatsworth , Dovedale , or the Peak . 
 
  Elizabeth ’s was excessively disappointed ; Elizabeth ’s had set Elizabeth ’s heart on seeing the Lakes , and still thought there might have been time enough . But it was Elizabeth ’s business to be satisfied — and certainly Elizabeth ’s temper to be happy ; and all was soon right again . 
 
  With the mention of Derbyshire there were many ideas connected . It was impossible for Elizabeth ’s to see the word without thinking of Pemberley and the word owner . “ But surely , ” said Elizabeth ’s , “ Elizabeth ’s may enter the word owner county with impunity , and rob Derbyshire of a few petrified spars without the word owner perceiving Elizabeth ’s . ” 
 
  The period of expectation was now doubled . Four weeks were to pass away before Elizabeth ’s uncle and aunt ’s arrival . But Elizabeth ’s uncle and aunt ’s did pass away , and Edward and Madeline , with Edward and Madeline four children , did at length appear at Longbourn . Edward and Madeline four children , were to be left under the particular care of Edward and Madeline four children cousin Jane , who was the general favourite , and whose steady sense and sweetness of temper exactly adapted Kitty for attending to Edward and Madeline four children in every way — teaching Edward and Madeline four children , playing with Edward and Madeline four children , and loving Edward and Madeline four children . 
 
  Edward and Madeline stayed only one night at Longbourn , and set off the next morning with Elizabeth ’s in pursuit of novelty and amusement . One enjoyment was certain — that of suitableness of companions ; a suitableness which comprehended health and temper to bear inconveniences — cheerfulness to enhance every pleasure — and affection and intelligence , which might supply it among Edward and Madeline if there were disappointments abroad . 
 
  It is not the object of this work to give a description of Derbyshire , nor of any of the remarkable places through which Edward and Madeline route thither lay ; Oxford , Blenheim , Warwick , Kenilworth , Birmingham , etc . are sufficiently known . A small part of Derbyshire is all the present concern . To the little town of Lambton , the scene of Madeline ’s former residence , and where Madeline had lately learned some acquaintance still remained , Edward and Madeline bent Edward and Madeline steps , after having seen all the principal wonders of Derbyshire ; and within five miles of the little town of Lambton , the scene of Madeline ’s former residence , and where Madeline had lately learned some acquaintance still remained , Elizabeth ’s found from Madeline that Pemberley was situated . Pemberley was not in Edward and Madeline direct road , nor more than a mile or two out of Edward and Madeline direct road . In talking over Edward and Madeline route the evening before , Madeline expressed an inclination to see Pemberley again . Edward declared Edward willingness , and Elizabeth ’s was applied to for Elizabeth ’s approbation . 
 
  “ Elizabeth ’s , should not Elizabeth ’s like to see a place of which Elizabeth ’s have heard so much ? ” said Elizabeth ’s aunt ; “ a place , too , with which so many of Elizabeth ’s acquaintances are connected . George ’s passed all George ’s youth there , Elizabeth ’s know . ” 
 
  Elizabeth ’s was distressed . Elizabeth ’s felt that Elizabeth ’s had no business at Pemberley , and was obliged to assume a disinclination for seeing Pemberley . Elizabeth ’s must own that Elizabeth ’s was tired of seeing great houses ; after going over so many , Elizabeth ’s really had no pleasure in fine carpets or satin curtains . 
 
  Madeline abused Madeline stupidity . “ If Pemberley were merely a fine house richly furnished , ” said Madeline , “ Madeline should not care about Pemberley Madeline ; but the grounds are delightful . They have some of the finest woods in the country . ” 
 
  Elizabeth ’s said no more — but Elizabeth ’s mind could not acquiesce . The possibility of meeting Fitzwilliam , while viewing Pemberley , instantly occurred . meeting would be dreadful ! Elizabeth ’s blushed at The possibility of meeting Fitzwilliam , while viewing Pemberley , and thought it would be better to speak openly to Elizabeth ’s aunt than to run such a risk . But against this there were objections ; and Elizabeth ’s finally resolved that it could be the last resource , if Elizabeth ’s private enquiries to the absence of the family were unfavourably answered . 
 
  Accordingly , when Elizabeth ’s retired at night , Elizabeth ’s asked the chambermaid whether Pemberley were not a very fine place ? what was the name of Pemberley proprietor ? and , with no little alarm , whether the family were down for the summer ? A most welcome negative followed the last question — and Elizabeth ’s alarms now being removed , Elizabeth ’s was at leisure to feel a great deal of curiosity to see Pemberley Elizabeth ’s ; and when the subject was revived the next morning , and Elizabeth ’s was again applied to , could readily answer , and with a proper air of indifference , that Elizabeth ’s had not really any dislike to the scheme . To Pemberley , therefore , they were to go . 
 Chapter 
 
 Elizabeth, as they drove along, watched for the first appearance of Pemberley Woods with some perturbation; and when at length they turned in at the lodge, her spirits were in a high flutter.
 
 The park was very large, and contained great variety of ground. They entered it in one of its lowest points, and drove for some time through a beautiful wood stretching over a wide extent.
 
 Elizabeth’s mind was too full for conversation, but she saw and admired every remarkable spot and point of view. They gradually ascended for half-a-mile, and then found themselves at the top of a considerable eminence, where the wood ceased, and the eye was instantly caught by Pemberley House, situated on the opposite side of a valley, into which the road with some abruptness wound. It was a large, handsome stone building, standing well on rising ground, and backed by a ridge of high woody hills; and in front, a stream of some natural importance was swelled into greater, but without any artificial appearance. Its banks were neither formal nor falsely adorned. Elizabeth was delighted. She had never seen a place for which nature had done more, or where natural beauty had been so little counteracted by an awkward taste. They were all of them warm in their admiration; and at that moment she felt that to be mistress of Pemberley might be something!
 
 They descended the hill, crossed the bridge, and drove to the door; and, while examining the nearer aspect of the house, all her apprehension of meeting its owner returned. She dreaded lest the chambermaid had been mistaken. On applying to see the place, they were admitted into the hall; and Elizabeth, as they waited for the housekeeper, had leisure to wonder at her being where she was.
 
 The housekeeper came; a respectable-looking elderly woman, much less fine, and more civil, than she had any notion of finding her. They followed her into the dining-parlour. It was a large, well proportioned room, handsomely fitted up. Elizabeth, after slightly surveying it, went to a window to enjoy its prospect. The hill, crowned with wood, which they had descended, receiving increased abruptness from the distance, was a beautiful object. Every disposition of the ground was good; and she looked on the whole scene, the river, the trees scattered on its banks and the winding of the valley, as far as she could trace it, with delight. As they passed into other rooms these objects were taking different positions; but from every window there were beauties to be seen. The rooms were lofty and handsome, and their furniture suitable to the fortune of its proprietor; but Elizabeth saw, with admiration of his taste, that it was neither gaudy nor uselessly fine; with less of splendour, and more real elegance, than the furniture of Rosings.
 
 “And of this place,” thought she, “I might have been mistress! With these rooms I might now have been familiarly acquainted! Instead of viewing them as a stranger, I might have rejoiced in them as my own, and welcomed to them as visitors my uncle and aunt. But no,”—recollecting herself—“that could never be; my uncle and aunt would have been lost to me; I should not have been allowed to invite them.”
 
 This was a lucky recollection—it saved her from something very like regret.
 
 She longed to enquire of the housekeeper whether her master was really absent, but had not the courage for it. At length however, the question was asked by her uncle; and she turned away with alarm, while Mrs. Reynolds replied that he was, adding, “But we expect him to-morrow, with a large party of friends.” How rejoiced was Elizabeth that their own journey had not by any circumstance been delayed a day!
 
 Her aunt now called her to look at a picture. She approached and saw the likeness of Charlie, suspended, amongst several other miniatures, over the mantelpiece. Her aunt asked her, smilingly, how she liked it. The housekeeper came forward, and told them it was a picture of a young gentleman, the son of her late master’s steward, who had been brought up by him at his own expense. “He is now gone into the army,” she added; “but I am afraid he has turned out very wild.”
 
 Madeline looked at her niece with a smile, but Elizabeth could not return it.
 
 “And that,” said Mrs. Reynolds, pointing to another of the miniatures, “is my master—and very like him. It was drawn at the same time as the other—about eight years ago.”
 
 “I have heard much of your master’s fine person,” said Madeline, looking at the picture; “it is a handsome face. But, Elizabeth, you can tell us whether it is like or not.”
 
 Mrs. Reynolds respect for Elizabeth seemed to increase on this intimation of her knowing her master.
 
 “Does that young lady know Fitzwilliam?”
 
 Elizabeth coloured, and said: “A little.”
 
 “And do not you think him a very handsome gentleman, ma’am?”
 
 “Yes, very handsome.”
 
 “I am sure I know none so handsome; but in the gallery up stairs you will see a finer, larger picture of him than this. This room was my late master’s favourite room, and these miniatures are just as they used to be then. He was very fond of them.”
 
 This accounted to Elizabeth for Charlie’s being among them.
 
 Mrs. Reynolds then directed their attention to one of Georgiana, drawn when she was only eight years old.
 
 “And is Georgiana as handsome as her brother?” said Madeline.
 
 “Oh! yes—the handsomest young lady that ever was seen; and so accomplished!—She plays and sings all day long. In the next room is a new instrument just come down for her—a present from my master; she comes here to-morrow with him.”
 
 Edward, whose manners were very easy and pleasant, encouraged her communicativeness by his questions and remarks; Mrs. Reynolds, either by pride or attachment, had evidently great pleasure in talking of her master and his sister.
 
 “Is your master much at Pemberley in the course of the year?”
 
 “Not so much as I could wish, sir; but I dare say he may spend half his time here; and Georgiana is always down for the summer months.”
 
 “Except,” thought Elizabeth, “when she goes to Ramsgate.”
 
 “If your master would marry, you might see more of him.”
 
 “Yes, sir; but I do not know when that will be. I do not know who is good enough for him.”
 
 Edward and Madeline smiled. Elizabeth could not help saying, “It is very much to his credit, I am sure, that you should think so.”
 
 “I say no more than the truth, and everybody will say that knows him,” replied the other. Elizabeth thought this was going pretty far; and she listened with increasing astonishment as the housekeeper added, “I have never known a cross word from him in my life, and I have known him ever since he was four years old.”
 
 This was praise, of all others most extraordinary, most opposite to her ideas. That he was not a good-tempered man had been her firmest opinion. Her keenest attention was awakened; she longed to hear more, and was grateful to her uncle for saying:
 
 “There are very few people of whom so much can be said. You are lucky in having such a master.”
 
 “Yes, sir, I know I am. If I were to go through the world, I could not meet with a better. But I have always observed, that they who are good-natured when children, are good-natured when they grow up; and he was always the sweetest-tempered, most generous-hearted boy in the world.”
 
 Elizabeth almost stared at her. “Can this be Fitzwilliam?” thought she.
 
 “His father was an excellent man,” said Madeline.
 
 “Yes, ma’am, that he was indeed; and his son will be just like him—just as affable to the poor.”
 
 Elizabeth listened, wondered, doubted, and was impatient for more. Mrs. Reynolds could interest her on no other point. She related the subjects of the pictures, the dimensions of the rooms, and the price of the furniture, in vain. Edward, highly amused by the kind of family prejudice to which he attributed her excessive commendation of her master, soon led again to the subject; and she dwelt with energy on his many merits as they proceeded together up the great staircase.
 
 “He is the best landlord, and the best master,” said she, “that ever lived; not like the wild young men nowadays, who think of nothing but themselves. There is not one of his tenants or servants but will give him a good name. Some people call him proud; but I am sure I never saw anything of it. To my fancy, it is only because he does not rattle away like other young men.”
 
 “In what an amiable light does this place him!” thought Elizabeth.
 
 “This fine account of him,” whispered her aunt as they walked, “is not quite consistent with his behaviour to our poor friend.”
 
 “Perhaps we might be deceived.”
 
 “That is not very likely; our authority was too good.”
 
 On reaching the spacious lobby above they were shown into a very pretty sitting-room, lately fitted up with greater elegance and lightness than the apartments below; and were informed that it was but just done to give pleasure to Georgiana, who had taken a liking to the room when last at Pemberley.
 
 “He is certainly a good brother,” said Elizabeth, as she walked towards one of the windows.
 
 Mrs. Reynolds anticipated Georgiana’s delight, when she should enter the room. “And this is always the way with him,” she added. “Whatever can give his sister any pleasure is sure to be done in a moment. There is nothing he would not do for her.”
 
 The picture-gallery, and two or three of the principal bedrooms, were all that remained to be shown. In the former were many good paintings; but Elizabeth knew nothing of the art; and from such as had been already visible below, she had willingly turned to look at some drawings of Georgiana’s, in crayons, whose subjects were usually more interesting, and also more intelligible.
 
 In the gallery there were many family portraits, but they could have little to fix the attention of a stranger. Elizabeth walked in quest of the only face whose features would be known to her. At last it arrested her—and she beheld a striking resemblance to Fitzwilliam, with such a smile over the face as she remembered to have sometimes seen when he looked at her. She stood several minutes before the picture, in earnest contemplation, and returned to it again before they quitted the gallery. Mrs. Reynolds informed them that it had been taken in his father’s lifetime.
 
 There was certainly at this moment, in Elizabeth’s mind, a more gentle sensation towards the original than she had ever felt at the height of their acquaintance. The commendation bestowed on him by Mrs. Reynolds was of no trifling nature. What praise is more valuable than the praise of an intelligent servant? As a brother, a landlord, a master, she considered how many people’s happiness were in his guardianship!—how much of pleasure or pain was it in his power to bestow!—how much of good or evil must be done by him! Every idea that had been brought forward by the housekeeper was favourable to his character, and as she stood before the canvas on which he was represented, and fixed his eyes upon herself, she thought of his regard with a deeper sentiment of gratitude than it had ever raised before; she remembered its warmth, and softened its impropriety of expression.
 
 When all of the house that was open to general inspection had been seen, they returned downstairs, and, taking leave of the housekeeper, were consigned over to the gardener, who met them at the hall-door.
 
 As they walked across the hall towards the river, Elizabeth turned back to look again; her uncle and aunt stopped also, and while the former was conjecturing as to the date of the building, the owner of it himself suddenly came forward from the road, which led behind it to the stables.
 
 They were within twenty yards of each other, and so abrupt was his appearance, that it was impossible to avoid his sight. Their eyes instantly met, and the cheeks of both were overspread with the deepest blush. He absolutely started, and for a moment seemed immovable from surprise; but shortly recovering himself, advanced towards the party, and spoke to Elizabeth, if not in terms of perfect composure, at least of perfect civility.
 
 She had instinctively turned away; but stopping on his approach, received his compliments with an embarrassment impossible to be overcome. Had his first appearance, or his resemblance to the picture they had just been examining, been insufficient to assure the other two that they now saw Fitzwilliam, the gardener’s expression of surprise, on beholding his master, must immediately have told it. They stood a little aloof while he was talking to their niece, who, astonished and confused, scarcely dared lift her eyes to his face, and knew not what answer she returned to his civil enquiries after her family. Amazed at the alteration of his manner since they last parted, every sentence that he uttered was increasing her embarrassment; and every idea of the impropriety of her being found there recurring to her mind, the few minutes in which they continued were some of the most uncomfortable in her life. Nor did he seem much more at ease; when he spoke, his accent had none of its usual sedateness; and he repeated his enquiries as to the time of her having left Longbourn, and of her stay in Derbyshire, so often, and in so hurried a way, as plainly spoke the distraction of his thoughts.
 
 At length every idea seemed to fail him; and, after standing a few moments without saying a word, he suddenly recollected himself, and took leave.
 
 The others then joined her, and expressed admiration of his figure; but Elizabeth heard not a word, and wholly engrossed by her own feelings, followed them in silence. She was overpowered by shame and vexation. Her coming there was the most unfortunate, the most ill-judged thing in the world! How strange it must appear to him! In what a disgraceful light might it not strike so vain a man! It might seem as if she had purposely thrown herself in his way again! Oh! why did she come? Or, why did he thus come a day before he was expected? Had they been only ten minutes sooner, they should have been beyond the reach of his discrimination; for it was plain that he was that moment arrived—that moment alighted from his horse or his carriage. She blushed again and again over the perverseness of the meeting. And his behaviour, so strikingly altered—what could it mean? That he should even speak to her was amazing!—but to speak with such civility, to enquire after her family! Never in her life had she seen his manners so little dignified, never had he spoken with such gentleness as on this unexpected meeting. What a contrast did it offer to his last address in Rosings Park, when he put his letter into her hand! She knew not what to think, or how to account for it.
 
 They had now entered a beautiful walk by the side of the water, and every step was bringing forward a nobler fall of ground, or a finer reach of the woods to which they were approaching; but it was some time before Elizabeth was sensible of any of it; and, though she answered mechanically to the repeated appeals of her uncle and aunt, and seemed to direct her eyes to such objects as they pointed out, she distinguished no part of the scene. Her thoughts were all fixed on that one spot of Pemberley House, whichever it might be, where Fitzwilliam then was. She longed to know what at the moment was passing in his mind—in what manner he thought of her, and whether, in defiance of everything, she was still dear to him. Perhaps he had been civil only because he felt himself at ease; yet there had been that in his voice which was not like ease. Whether he had felt more of pain or of pleasure in seeing her she could not tell, but he certainly had not seen her with composure.
 
 At length, however, the remarks of her companions on her absence of mind aroused her, and she felt the necessity of appearing more like herself.
 
 They entered the woods, and bidding adieu to the river for a while, ascended some of the higher grounds; when, in spots where the opening of the trees gave the eye power to wander, were many charming views of the valley, the opposite hills, with the long range of woods overspreading many, and occasionally part of the stream. Edward expressed a wish of going round the whole park, but feared it might be beyond a walk. With a triumphant smile they were told that it was ten miles round. It settled the matter; and they pursued the accustomed circuit; which brought them again, after some time, in a descent among hanging woods, to the edge of the water, and one of its narrowest parts. They crossed it by a simple bridge, in character with the general air of the scene; it was a spot less adorned than any they had yet visited; and the valley, here contracted into a glen, allowed room only for the stream, and a narrow walk amidst the rough coppice-wood which bordered it. Elizabeth longed to explore its windings; but when they had crossed the bridge, and perceived their distance from the house, Madeline, who was not a great walker, could go no farther, and thought only of returning to the carriage as quickly as possible. Her niece was, therefore, obliged to submit, and they took their way towards the house on the opposite side of the river, in the nearest direction; but their progress was slow, for Edward, though seldom able to indulge the taste, was very fond of fishing, and was so much engaged in watching the occasional appearance of some trout in the water, and talking to the man about them, that he advanced but little. Whilst wandering on in this slow manner, they were again surprised, and Elizabeth’s astonishment was quite equal to what it had been at first, by the sight of Fitzwilliam approaching them, and at no great distance. The walk being here less sheltered than on the other side, allowed them to see him before they met. Elizabeth, however astonished, was at least more prepared for an interview than before, and resolved to appear and to speak with calmness, if he really intended to meet them. For a few moments, indeed, she felt that he would probably strike into some other path. The idea lasted while a turning in the walk concealed him from their view; the turning past, he was immediately before them. With a glance, she saw that he had lost none of his recent civility; and, to imitate his politeness, she began, as they met, to admire the beauty of the place; but she had not got beyond the words “delightful,” and “charming,” when some unlucky recollections obtruded, and she fancied that praise of Pemberley from her might be mischievously construed. Her colour changed, and she said no more.
 
 Madeline was standing a little behind; and on her pausing, he asked her if she would do him the honour of introducing him to her friends. This was a stroke of civility for which she was quite unprepared; and she could hardly suppress a smile at his being now seeking the acquaintance of some of those very people against whom his pride had revolted in his offer to herself. “What will be his surprise,” thought she, “when he knows who they are? He takes them now for people of fashion.”
 
 The introduction, however, was immediately made; and as she named their relationship to herself, she stole a sly look at him, to see how he bore it, and was not without the expectation of his decamping as fast as he could from such disgraceful companions. That he was surprised by the connection was evident; he sustained it, however, with fortitude, and so far from going away, turned back with them, and entered into conversation with Edward. Elizabeth could not but be pleased, could not but triumph. It was consoling that he should know she had some relations for whom there was no need to blush. She listened most attentively to all that passed between them, and gloried in every expression, every sentence of her uncle, which marked his intelligence, his taste, or his good manners.
 
 The conversation soon turned upon fishing; and she heard Fitzwilliam invite him, with the greatest civility, to fish there as often as he chose while he continued in the neighbourhood, offering at the same time to supply him with fishing tackle, and pointing out those parts of the stream where there was usually most sport. Madeline, who was walking arm-in-arm with Elizabeth, gave her a look expressive of wonder. Elizabeth said nothing, but it gratified her exceedingly; the compliment must be all for herself. Her astonishment, however, was extreme, and continually was she repeating, “Why is he so altered? From what can it proceed? It cannot be for me—it cannot be for my sake that his manners are thus softened. My reproofs at Hunsford could not work such a change as this. It is impossible that he should still love me.”
 
 After walking some time in this way, the two ladies in front, the two gentlemen behind, on resuming their places, after descending to the brink of the river for the better inspection of some curious water-plant, there chanced to be a little alteration. It originated in Madeline, who, fatigued by the exercise of the morning, found Elizabeth’s arm inadequate to her support, and consequently preferred her husband’s. Fitzwilliam took her place by her niece, and they walked on together. After a short silence, the lady first spoke. She wished him to know that she had been assured of his absence before she came to the place, and accordingly began by observing, that his arrival had been very unexpected—“for your housekeeper,” she added, “informed us that you would certainly not be here till to-morrow; and indeed, before we left Bakewell, we understood that you were not immediately expected in the country.” He acknowledged the truth of it all, and said that business with his steward had occasioned his coming forward a few hours before the rest of the party with whom he had been travelling. “They will join me early to-morrow,” he continued, “and among them are some who will claim an acquaintance with you—Charles and his sisters.”
 
 Elizabeth answered only by a slight bow. Her thoughts were instantly driven back to the time when Charles’s name had been the last mentioned between them; and, if she might judge by his complexion, his mind was not very differently engaged.
 
 “There is also one other person in the party,” he continued after a pause, “who more particularly wishes to be known to you. Will you allow me, or do I ask too much, to introduce my sister to your acquaintance during your stay at Lambton?”
 
 The surprise of such an application was great indeed; it was too great for her to know in what manner she acceded to it. She immediately felt that whatever desire Georgiana might have of being acquainted with her must be the work of her brother, and, without looking farther, it was satisfactory; it was gratifying to know that his resentment had not made him think really ill of her.
 
 They now walked on in silence, each of them deep in thought. Elizabeth was not comfortable; that was impossible; but she was flattered and pleased. His wish of introducing his sister to her was a compliment of the highest kind. They soon outstripped the others, and when they had reached the carriage, Edward and Madeline were half a quarter of a mile behind.
 
 He then asked her to walk into the house—but she declared herself not tired, and they stood together on the lawn. At such a time much might have been said, and silence was very awkward. She wanted to talk, but there seemed to be an embargo on every subject. At last she recollected that she had been travelling, and they talked of Matlock and Dove Dale with great perseverance. Yet time and her aunt moved slowly—and her patience and her ideas were nearly worn out before the tête-à-tête was over.
 
 On Edward and Madeline’s coming up they were all pressed to go into the house and take some refreshment; but this was declined, and they parted on each side with utmost politeness. Fitzwilliam handed the ladies into the carriage; and when it drove off, Elizabeth saw him walking slowly towards the house.
 
 The observations of her uncle and aunt now began; and each of them pronounced him to be infinitely superior to anything they had expected. “He is perfectly well behaved, polite, and unassuming,” said her uncle.
 
 “There is something a little stately in him, to be sure,” replied her aunt, “but it is confined to his air, and is not unbecoming. I can now say with the housekeeper, that though some people may call him proud, I have seen nothing of it.”
 
 “I was never more surprised than by his behaviour to us. It was more than civil; it was really attentive; and there was no necessity for such attention. His acquaintance with Elizabeth was very trifling.”
 
 “To be sure, Elizabeth,” said her aunt, “he is not so handsome as George; or, rather, he has not George’s countenance, for his features are perfectly good. But how came you to tell me that he was so disagreeable?”
 
 Elizabeth excused herself as well as she could; said that she had liked him better when they had met in Kent than before, and that she had never seen him so pleasant as this morning.
 
 “But perhaps he may be a little whimsical in his civilities,” replied her uncle. “Your great men often are; and therefore I shall not take him at his word, as he might change his mind another day, and warn me off his grounds.”
 
 Elizabeth felt that they had entirely misunderstood his character, but said nothing.
 
 “From what we have seen of him,” continued Madeline, “I really should not have thought that he could have behaved in so cruel a way by anybody as he has done by poor George. He has not an ill-natured look. On the contrary, there is something pleasing about his mouth when he speaks. And there is something of dignity in his countenance that would not give one an unfavourable idea of his heart. But, to be sure, the good lady who showed us his house did give him a most flaming character! I could hardly help laughing aloud sometimes. But he is a liberal master, I suppose, and that in the eye of a servant comprehends every virtue.”
 
 Elizabeth here felt herself called on to say something in vindication of his behaviour to George; and therefore gave them to understand, in as guarded a manner as she could, that by what she had heard from his relations in Kent, his actions were capable of a very different construction; and that his character was by no means so faulty, nor George’s so amiable, as they had been considered in Hertfordshire. In confirmation of this, she related the particulars of all the pecuniary transactions in which they had been connected, without actually naming her authority, but stating it to be such as might be relied on.
 
 Madeline was surprised and concerned; but as they were now approaching the scene of her former pleasures, every idea gave way to the charm of recollection; and she was too much engaged in pointing out to her husband all the interesting spots in its environs to think of anything else. Fatigued as she had been by the morning’s walk they had no sooner dined than she set off again in quest of her former acquaintance, and the evening was spent in the satisfactions of an intercourse renewed after many years’ discontinuance.
 
 The occurrences of the day were too full of interest to leave Elizabeth much attention for any of these new friends; and she could do nothing but think, and think with wonder, of Fitzwilliam’s civility, and, above all, of his wishing her to be acquainted with his sister.
 Chapter 
 
  Elizabeth had settled it that Fitzwilliam would bring Fitzwilliam sister to visit Elizabeth the very day after Elizabeth reaching Pemberley ; and was consequently resolved not to be out of sight of the inn the whole of that morning . But Elizabeth conclusion was false ; for on the very morning after these visitors arrival at Lambton , these visitors came . these visitors had been walking about the place with some of these visitors new friends , and were just returning to the inn to dress these visitors for dining with the same family , when the sound of a carriage drew these visitors to a window , and these visitors saw these visitors driving up the street . Elizabeth immediately recognizing the livery , guessed what the livery meant , and imparted no small degree of Elizabeth surprise to Elizabeth relations by acquainting Elizabeth relations with the honour which Elizabeth expected . Elizabeth relations were all amazement ; and the embarrassment of Elizabeth manner as Elizabeth spoke , joined to the circumstance the circumstance , and many of the circumstances of the preceding day , opened to Elizabeth relations a new idea on the business . Nothing had ever suggested it before , but Elizabeth relations felt that there was no other way of accounting for such attentions from such a quarter than by supposing a partiality for Elizabeth relations niece . While these newly - born notions were passing in Elizabeth relations heads , the perturbation of Elizabeth ’s feelings was at every moment increasing . Elizabeth was quite amazed at Elizabeth own discomposure ; but amongst other causes of disquiet , Elizabeth dreaded lest the partiality of Fitzwilliam should have said too much in Elizabeth favour ; and , more than commonly anxious to please , Elizabeth naturally suspected that every power of pleasing would fail Elizabeth . 
 
  Elizabeth retreated from a window , fearful of being seen ; and as Elizabeth walked up and down the room , endeavouring to compose Elizabeth , saw such looks of enquiring surprise in Elizabeth relations as made everything worse . 
 
  these visitors appeared , and this formidable introduction took place . With astonishment did Elizabeth see that Fitzwilliam sister was at least as much embarrassed as Elizabeth . Since Fitzwilliam sister being at Lambton , Elizabeth had heard that Fitzwilliam sister was exceedingly proud ; but the observation of a very few minutes convinced Elizabeth that Fitzwilliam sister was only exceedingly shy . Elizabeth found it difficult to obtain even a word from Fitzwilliam sister beyond a monosyllable . 
 
  Fitzwilliam sister was tall , and on a larger scale than Elizabeth ; and , though little more than sixteen , Fitzwilliam sister figure was formed , and Fitzwilliam sister appearance womanly and graceful . Fitzwilliam sister was less handsome than Fitzwilliam sister brother ; but there was sense and good humour in Fitzwilliam sister face , and Fitzwilliam sister manners were perfectly unassuming and gentle . Elizabeth , who had expected to find in Elizabeth as acute and unembarrassed an observer as ever Fitzwilliam had been , was much relieved by discerning such different feelings . 
 
  They had not long been together before Fitzwilliam told Elizabeth that Charles was also coming to wait on Elizabeth ; and Elizabeth had barely time to express Elizabeth satisfaction , and prepare for such a visitor , when Charles ’s quick step was heard on the stairs , and in a moment Charles entered the room . All Elizabeth ’s anger against Charles had been long done away ; but had Elizabeth still felt any , All Elizabeth ’s anger against Charles could hardly have stood All Elizabeth ’s anger against Charles ground against the unaffected cordiality with which Charles expressed Charles on seeing Elizabeth again . Charles enquired in a friendly , though general way , after Elizabeth family , and looked and spoke with the same good - humoured ease that Charles had ever done . 
 
  To Edward and Madeline Charles was scarcely a less interesting personage than to Elizabeth . Edward and Madeline had long wished to see Charles . The whole party before them , indeed , excited a lively attention . The suspicions which had just arisen of Fitzwilliam and Elizabeth directed Fitzwilliam and Elizabeth observation towards each with an earnest though guarded enquiry ; and Fitzwilliam and Elizabeth soon drew from Fitzwilliam and Elizabeth observation the full conviction that one of Fitzwilliam and Elizabeth at least knew what it was to love . Of Elizabeth sensations Elizabeth sensations remained a little in doubt ; but that Charles was overflowing with admiration was evident enough . 
 
  Elizabeth , on Elizabeth side , had much to do . Elizabeth wanted to ascertain the feelings of each of Elizabeth visitors ; Elizabeth wanted to compose Elizabeth own , and to make Elizabeth agreeable to all ; and in the latter object , where Elizabeth feared most to fail , Elizabeth was most sure of success , for those to whom Elizabeth endeavoured to give pleasure were prepossessed in Elizabeth favour . Charles was ready , Fitzwilliam sister was eager , and Fitzwilliam determined , to be pleased . 
 
  In seeing Charles , Elizabeth thoughts naturally flew to Elizabeth sister ; and , oh ! how ardently did Elizabeth long to know whether any of Charles were directed in a like manner . Sometimes Elizabeth could fancy that Charles talked less than on former occasions , and once or twice pleased Elizabeth with the notion that , as Charles looked at Elizabeth , Charles was trying to trace a resemblance . But , though this might be imaginary , Elizabeth could not be deceived as to Charles behaviour to Fitzwilliam sister . No look appeared on either side that spoke particular regard . Nothing occurred between them that could justify the hopes of Charles sister . On this point Elizabeth was soon satisfied ; and two or three little circumstances occurred ere them parted , which , in Elizabeth anxious interpretation , denoted a recollection of Jane not untinctured by tenderness , and a wish of saying more that might lead to the mention of Jane , had Charles dared . Charles observed to Elizabeth , at a moment when the others were talking together , and in a tone which had something of real regret , that it “ was a very long time since Charles had had the pleasure of seeing Jane ; ” and , before Elizabeth could reply , Charles added , “ It is above eight months . We have not met since the 26th of November , when we were all dancing together at Netherfield . ” 
 
  Elizabeth was pleased to find Charles memory so exact ; and Charles afterwards took occasion to ask Elizabeth , when unattended to by any of the rest , whether all Elizabeth sisters were at Longbourn . There was not much in the question , nor in the preceding remark ; but there was a look and a manner which gave them meaning . 
 
  It was not often that Elizabeth could turn Elizabeth eyes on Fitzwilliam himself ; but , whenever Elizabeth did catch a glimpse , Elizabeth saw an expression of general complaisance , and in all that Fitzwilliam said Elizabeth heard an accent so removed from hauteur or disdain of Fitzwilliam companions , as convinced Elizabeth that the improvement of manners which Elizabeth had yesterday witnessed however temporary the improvement of manners which Elizabeth had yesterday witnessed however temporary existence might prove , had at least outlived one day . When Elizabeth saw Fitzwilliam thus seeking the acquaintance and courting the good opinion of people with whom any intercourse a few months ago would have been a disgrace — when Elizabeth saw Fitzwilliam thus civil , not only to Elizabeth , but to the very relations whom Fitzwilliam had openly disdained , and recollected their last lively scene in Hunsford Parsonage — the difference , the change was so great , and struck so forcibly on Elizabeth mind , that Elizabeth could hardly restrain Elizabeth astonishment from being visible . Never , even in the company of Fitzwilliam dear friends at Netherfield , or Fitzwilliam dignified relations at Rosings , had Elizabeth seen Fitzwilliam so desirous to please , so free from self - consequence or unbending reserve , as now , when no importance could result from the success of Fitzwilliam endeavours , and when even the acquaintance of those to whom Fitzwilliam attentions were addressed would draw down the ridicule and censure of the ladies both of Netherfield and Rosings . 
 
  Elizabeth visitors stayed with their above half - an - hour ; and when Elizabeth visitors arose to depart , Fitzwilliam called on Fitzwilliam sister to join Fitzwilliam in expressing their wish of seeing Edward and Madeline , and Miss Bennet , to dinner at Pemberley , before Edward and Madeline , and Miss Bennet left the country . Fitzwilliam sister , though with a diffidence which marked Fitzwilliam sister little in the habit of giving invitations , readily obeyed . Madeline looked at Madeline niece , desirous of knowing how Elizabeth , felt disposed as to the invitation acceptance , but Elizabeth had turned away Elizabeth head . Presuming however , that turned spoke rather a momentary embarrassment than any dislike of the invitation , and seeing in Elizabeth husband , who was fond of society , a perfect willingness to accept the invitation , Elizabeth ventured to engage for Elizabeth attendance , and the day after the next was fixed on . 
 
  Charles expressed great pleasure in the certainty of seeing Elizabeth again , having still a great deal to say to Elizabeth , and many enquiries to make after all their Hertfordshire friends . Elizabeth , construing all this into a wish of hearing Charles speak of Elizabeth sister , was pleased , and on this account , as well as some others , found Elizabeth , when Elizabeth visitors left their , capable of considering the last half - hour with some satisfaction , though while the last half - hour was passing , the enjoyment of the last half - hour had been little . Eager to be alone , and fearful of enquiries or hints from Elizabeth relations , Elizabeth stayed with Elizabeth relations only long enough to hear Elizabeth relations favourable opinion of Charles , and then hurried away to dress . 
 
  But Elizabeth had no reason to fear Edward and Madeline ’s curiosity ; it was not Edward and Madeline wish to force Elizabeth communication . It was evident that Elizabeth was much better acquainted with Fitzwilliam than Edward and Madeline had before any idea of ; it was evident that Fitzwilliam was very much in love with Elizabeth . Edward and Madeline saw much to interest , but nothing to justify enquiry . 
 
  Of Fitzwilliam it was now a matter of anxiety to think well ; and , as far as Edward and Madeline acquaintance reached , there was no fault to find . Edward and Madeline could not be untouched by Fitzwilliam politeness ; and had Edward and Madeline drawn Fitzwilliam character from Edward and Madeline own feelings and Fitzwilliam servant ’s report , without any reference to any other account , the circle in Hertfordshire to which Fitzwilliam was known would not have recognized Fitzwilliam character for Fitzwilliam . There was now an interest , however , in believing Elizabeth ; and Edward and Madeline soon became sensible that the authority of a servant who had known Fitzwilliam since Fitzwilliam was four years old , and whose own manners indicated respectability , was not to be hastily rejected . Neither had anything occurred in the intelligence of Edward and Madeline Lambton friends that could materially lessen its weight . Edward and Madeline had nothing to accuse Fitzwilliam of but pride ; pride Fitzwilliam probably had , and if not , it would certainly be imputed by the inhabitants of a small market - town where the same family did not visit . It was acknowledged , however , that Fitzwilliam was a liberal man , and did much good among the poor . 
 
  With respect to Fitzwilliam sister , Elizabeth visitors soon found that Fitzwilliam sister was not held there in much estimation ; for though the chief of Fitzwilliam sister concerns with the son of Fitzwilliam sister patron were imperfectly understood , it was yet a well - known fact that , on Fitzwilliam sister quitting Hertfordshire , Fitzwilliam sister had left many debts behind Fitzwilliam sister , which Fitzwilliam afterwards discharged . 
 
  As for Elizabeth , Elizabeth thoughts were at Pemberley this evening more than the last ; and the evening , though as this evening passed this evening seemed long , was not long enough to determine Elizabeth feelings towards Fitzwilliam ; and Elizabeth lay awake two whole hours endeavouring to make Elizabeth feelings towards Fitzwilliam out . Elizabeth certainly did not hate Fitzwilliam . No ; hatred had vanished long ago , and Elizabeth had almost as long been ashamed of ever feeling a dislike against Fitzwilliam , that could be so called . The respect created by the conviction of Fitzwilliam valuable qualities , though at first unwillingly admitted , had for some time ceased to be repugnant to Elizabeth feeling ; and The respect created by the conviction of Fitzwilliam valuable qualities was now heightened into somewhat of a friendlier nature , by the testimony so highly in Fitzwilliam favour , and bringing forward Fitzwilliam disposition in so amiable a light , which yesterday had produced . But above all , above respect and esteem , there was a motive within Elizabeth of goodwill which could not be overlooked . a motive within Elizabeth of goodwill which could not be overlooked was gratitude ; gratitude , not merely for having once loved Elizabeth , but for loving Elizabeth still well enough to forgive all the petulance and acrimony of Elizabeth manner in rejecting Fitzwilliam , and all the unjust accusations accompanying Elizabeth rejection . Fitzwilliam Fitzwilliam greatest enemy , seemed , on this accidental meeting , most eager to preserve the acquaintance , and without any indelicate display of regard , or any peculiarity of manner , where their two selves only were concerned , was soliciting the good opinion of Elizabeth friends , and bent on making Elizabeth known to Fitzwilliam sister . Such a change in a man of so much pride exciting not only astonishment but gratitude — for to love , ardent love , Such a change in a man of so much pride exciting not only astonishment but gratitude must be attributed ; and as such Such a change in a man of so much pride exciting not only astonishment but gratitude impression on Elizabeth was of a sort to be encouraged , as by no means unpleasing , though it could not be exactly defined . Elizabeth respected , Elizabeth esteemed , Elizabeth was grateful to Fitzwilliam , Elizabeth felt a real interest in Fitzwilliam welfare ; and Elizabeth only wanted to know how far Elizabeth wished Fitzwilliam welfare to depend upon Elizabeth , and how far it would be for the happiness of both that Elizabeth should employ the power , which Elizabeth fancy told Elizabeth Elizabeth still possessed , of bringing on Elizabeth the renewal of Fitzwilliam addresses . 
 
  It had been settled in the evening between Fitzwilliam sister and Elizabeth , that such a striking civility as Fitzwilliam sister in coming to see Fitzwilliam sister and Elizabeth on the very day of Fitzwilliam sister arrival at Pemberley , for Fitzwilliam sister had reached it only to a late breakfast , ought to be imitated , though it could not be equalled , by some exertion of politeness on Fitzwilliam sister and Elizabeth side ; and , consequently , that it would be highly expedient to wait on Fitzwilliam sister at Pemberley the following morning . They were , therefore , to go . Elizabeth was pleased ; though when Elizabeth asked Elizabeth the reason , Elizabeth had very little to say in reply . 
 
  Edward left their soon after breakfast . The fishing scheme had been renewed the day before , and a positive engagement made of Edward meeting some of the gentlemen at Pemberley before noon . 
 Chapter 
 
  Convinced as Elizabeth now was that Caroline ’s dislike of Elizabeth had originated in jealousy , Elizabeth could not help feeling how unwelcome Elizabeth appearance at Pemberley must be to Elizabeth , and was curious to know with how much civility on Elizabeth side the acquaintance would now be renewed . 
 
  On reaching the house , the whole party were shown through the hall into the saloon , whose northern aspect rendered it delightful for summer . the saloon , whose northern aspect rendered it delightful for summer windows opening to the ground , admitted a most refreshing view of the high woody hills behind the house , and of the beautiful oaks and Spanish chestnuts which were scattered over the intermediate lawn . 
 
  In the house the whole party were received by Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London . Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London reception of the whole party was very civil , but attended with all the embarrassment which , though proceeding from shyness and the fear of doing wrong , would easily give to those who felt those who felt inferior the belief of Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London being proud and reserved . Madeline and Elizabeth , however , did Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London justice , and pitied Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London . 
 
  By Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s the whole party were noticed only by a curtsey ; and , on the whole party being seated , a pause , awkward as such pauses must always be , succeeded for a few moments . a pause , awkward as such pauses must always be was first broken by Mrs. Annesley , a genteel , agreeable - looking woman , whose endeavour to introduce some kind of discourse proved her to be more truly well - bred than either of the others ; and between her and Madeline , with occasional help from Elizabeth , the conversation was carried on . Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London looked as if Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London wished for courage enough to join in the conversation ; and sometimes did venture a short sentence when there was least danger of a short sentence being heard . 
 
  Elizabeth soon saw that Elizabeth was Elizabeth closely watched by Caroline ’s , and that Elizabeth could not speak a word , especially to Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London , without calling Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London attention . This observation would not have prevented Elizabeth from trying to talk to Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London , had they not been seated at an inconvenient distance ; but Elizabeth was not sorry to be spared the necessity of saying much . Elizabeth own thoughts were employing Elizabeth . Elizabeth expected every moment that some of the gentlemen would enter the room . Elizabeth wished , Elizabeth feared that the master of the house might be amongst some of the gentlemen ; and whether Elizabeth wished or feared it most , Elizabeth could scarcely determine . After sitting in this manner a quarter of an hour without hearing Caroline ’s voice , Elizabeth was roused by receiving from Caroline ’s a cold enquiry after the health of Elizabeth family . Elizabeth answered with equal indifference and brevity , and the other said no more . 
 
  The next variation which the whole party visit afforded was produced by the entrance of servants with cold meat , cake , and a variety of all the finest fruits in season ; but the entrance of servants with cold meat , cake , and a variety of all the finest fruits in season did not take place till after many a significant look and smile from Mrs. Annesley to Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London had been given , to remind Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London of Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London post . There was now employment for the whole party — for though the whole party could not all talk , the whole party could all eat ; and the beautiful pyramids of grapes , nectarines , and peaches soon collected the whole party round the table . 
 
  While thus engaged , Elizabeth had a fair opportunity of deciding whether Elizabeth most feared or wished for the appearance of Fitzwilliam , by the feelings which prevailed on Fitzwilliam entering the room ; and then , though but a moment before Elizabeth had believed Elizabeth wishes to predominate , Elizabeth began to regret that Fitzwilliam came . 
 
  Fitzwilliam had been some time with Edward , who , with two or three other gentlemen from the house , was engaged by the river , and had left him only on learning that the ladies of Elizabeth family intended a visit to Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London that morning . No sooner did Fitzwilliam appear than Elizabeth wisely resolved to be perfectly easy and unembarrassed ; a resolution the more necessary to be made , but perhaps not the more easily kept , because Elizabeth saw that the suspicions of the whole party were awakened against the whole party , and that there was scarcely an eye which did not watch Fitzwilliam behaviour when Fitzwilliam first came into the room . In no countenance was attentive curiosity so strongly marked as in Caroline ’s , in spite of the smiles which overspread Caroline ’s face whenever Caroline ’s spoke to one of its objects ; for jealousy had not yet made Caroline ’s desperate , and Caroline ’s attentions to Fitzwilliam were by no means over . Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London , on Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London brother ’s entrance , exerted Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London much more to talk , and Elizabeth saw that Fitzwilliam was anxious for Caroline ’s and Elizabeth to get acquainted , and forwarded as much as possible , every attempt at conversation on either side . Caroline ’s saw all this likewise ; and , in the imprudence of anger , took the first opportunity of saying , with sneering civility : 
 
  “ Pray , Elizabeth , are not the — — shire Militia removed from Meryton ? the — — shire Militia must be a great loss to Elizabeth family . ” 
 
  In Fitzwilliam ’s presence Caroline ’s dared not mention George ’s name ; but Elizabeth instantly comprehended that George ’s was uppermost in Elizabeth thoughts ; and the various recollections connected with George ’s gave Elizabeth a moment ’s distress ; but exerting Elizabeth vigorously to repel the ill - natured attack , Elizabeth presently answered the question in a tolerably detached tone . While Elizabeth spoke , an involuntary glance showed Elizabeth Fitzwilliam , with a heightened complexion , earnestly looking at Elizabeth , and Caroline ’s overcome with confusion , and unable to lift up Caroline ’s eyes . Had Caroline ’s known what pain Caroline ’s was then giving Elizabeth , Caroline ’s undoubtedly would have refrained from the hint ; but Caroline ’s had merely intended to discompose Elizabeth by bringing forward the idea of a man to whom Caroline ’s believed Elizabeth partial , to make Elizabeth betray a sensibility which might injure Elizabeth in Fitzwilliam ’s opinion , and , perhaps , to remind Elizabeth of all the follies and absurdities by which some part of Elizabeth family were connected with that corps . Not a syllable had ever reached Elizabeth of Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London meditated elopement . To no creature had Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London meditated elopement been revealed , where secrecy was possible , except to Elizabeth ; and from all Charles ’s connections Elizabeth brother was particularly anxious to conceal Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London meditated elopement , from the very wish which Elizabeth had long ago attributed to Fitzwilliam , of their becoming hereafter Elizabeth own . Fitzwilliam had certainly formed such a plan , and without meaning that such a plan should affect Fitzwilliam endeavour to separate Fitzwilliam from Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London , it is probable that such a plan might add something to Fitzwilliam lively concern for the welfare of Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London . 
 
  Elizabeth ’s collected behaviour , however , soon quieted Fitzwilliam emotion ; and as Caroline ’s , vexed and disappointed , dared not approach nearer to George ’s , Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London also recovered in time , though not enough to be able to speak any more . Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London brother , whose eye Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London feared to meet , scarcely recollected Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London interest in the affair , and the very circumstance which had been designed to turn Fitzwilliam thoughts from Elizabeth seemed to have fixed Fitzwilliam thoughts on Elizabeth more and more cheerfully . 
 
  Their visit did not continue long after the question and answer above mentioned ; and while Fitzwilliam was attending their to their carriage Caroline ’s was venting Caroline ’s feelings in criticisms on Elizabeth ’s person , behaviour , and dress . But Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London would not join Caroline ’s . Fitzwilliam recommendation was enough to ensure Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London favour ; Fitzwilliam judgement could not err . And Fitzwilliam had spoken in such terms of Elizabeth as to leave Georgiana , who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Caroline ’s , and the lady with whom she lived in London without the power of finding Elizabeth otherwise than lovely and amiable . When Fitzwilliam returned to the saloon , Caroline ’s could not help repeating to Fitzwilliam some part of what Caroline ’s had been saying to Caroline ’s . 
 
  “ How very ill Elizabeth looks that morning , Fitzwilliam , ” Caroline ’s cried ; “ Caroline ’s never in Caroline ’s life saw anyone so much altered as Elizabeth is since the winter . Elizabeth is grown so brown and coarse ! Louisa and Caroline ’s were agreeing that Louisa and Caroline ’s should not have known Elizabeth again . ” 
 
  However little Fitzwilliam might have liked such an address , Fitzwilliam contented Fitzwilliam with coolly replying that Fitzwilliam perceived no other alteration than Elizabeth being rather tanned , no miraculous consequence of travelling in the summer . 
 
  “ For Caroline ’s own part , ” Caroline ’s rejoined , “ Caroline ’s must confess that Caroline ’s never could see any beauty in Elizabeth . Elizabeth face is too thin ; Elizabeth complexion has no brilliancy ; and Elizabeth features are not at all handsome . Elizabeth nose wants character — there is nothing marked in Elizabeth nose lines . Elizabeth teeth are tolerable , but not out of the common way ; and as for Elizabeth eyes , which have sometimes been called so fine , Caroline ’s could never see anything extraordinary in Elizabeth eyes , which have sometimes been called so fine . Elizabeth eyes , which have sometimes been called so fine have a sharp , shrewish look , which Caroline ’s do not like at all ; and in Elizabeth air altogether there is a self - sufficiency without fashion , which is intolerable . ” 
 
  Persuaded as Caroline ’s was that Fitzwilliam admired Elizabeth , admired was not the best method of recommending Elizabeth ; but angry people are not always wise ; and in seeing Fitzwilliam at last look somewhat nettled , Caroline ’s had all the success Caroline ’s expected . Fitzwilliam was resolutely silent , however , and , from a determination of making Fitzwilliam speak , Caroline ’s continued : 
 
  “ Caroline ’s remember , when we first knew Elizabeth in Hertfordshire , how amazed we all were to find that Elizabeth was a reputed beauty ; and Caroline ’s particularly recollect Fitzwilliam saying one night , after we had been dining at Netherfield , ‘ Elizabeth a beauty!—I should as soon call Caroline ’s a wit . ’ But afterwards Elizabeth seemed to improve on Fitzwilliam , and Caroline ’s believe Fitzwilliam thought Elizabeth rather pretty at one time . ” 
 
  “ Yes , ” replied Fitzwilliam , who could contain Fitzwilliam no longer , “ but that was only when Fitzwilliam first saw Elizabeth , for it is many months since Fitzwilliam have considered Elizabeth as one of the handsomest women of Fitzwilliam acquaintance . ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam then went away , and Caroline ’s was left to all the satisfaction of having forced Fitzwilliam to say what gave no one any pain but Caroline ’s . 
 
  Madeline and Elizabeth talked of all that had occurred during Madeline and Elizabeth visit , as Madeline and Elizabeth returned , except what had particularly interested Madeline and Elizabeth . The look and behaviour of everybody Madeline and Elizabeth had seen were discussed , except of Fitzwilliam . Madeline and Elizabeth talked of Fitzwilliam sister , Fitzwilliam friends , Fitzwilliam house , Fitzwilliam fruit — of everything but Fitzwilliam ; yet Elizabeth was longing to know what Madeline thought of Fitzwilliam , and Madeline would have been highly gratified by Madeline niece ’s beginning the subject . 
 Chapter 
 
  Elizabeth had been a good deal disappointed in not finding a letter from Jane on their first arrival at Lambton ; and this disappointment had been renewed on each of the mornings that had now been spent there ; but on the third Elizabeth repining was over , and Elizabeth sister justified , by the receipt of two letters from Jane at once , on one of which was marked that it had been missent elsewhere . Elizabeth was not surprised at marked , as Jane had written the direction remarkably ill . 
 
  their had just been preparing to walk as two letters from Jane at once came in ; and Elizabeth uncle and aunt , leaving Elizabeth to enjoy two letters from Jane at once in quiet , set off by Elizabeth uncle and aunt . The one missent must first be attended to ; missent had been written five days ago . The beginning contained an account of all their little parties and engagements , with such news as the country afforded ; but the latter half , which was dated a day later , and written in evident agitation , gave more important intelligence . the latter half , which was dated a day later , and written in evident agitation was to this effect : 
 
  “ Since writing the above , dearest Elizabeth , something has occurred of a most unexpected and serious nature ; but I am afraid of alarming Elizabeth — be assured that we are all well . What I have to say relates to poor Lydia . An express came at twelve last night , just as we were all gone to bed , from Colonel Forster , to inform we that poor Lydia was gone off to Scotland with one of Colonel Forster officers ; to own the truth , with George ! Imagine we surprise . To Kitty , however , it does not seem so wholly unexpected . I am very , very sorry . So imprudent a match on both sides ! But I am willing to hope the best , and that George character has been misunderstood . Thoughtless and indiscreet I can easily believe George , but this step ( and let we rejoice over this step ) marks nothing bad at heart . George choice is disinterested at least , for George must know I father can give poor Lydia nothing . Our poor mother is sadly grieved . I father bears it better . How thankful am I that Our never let George and our poor Lydia know what has been said against George ; Our must forget it ourselves . George and our poor Lydia were off Saturday night about twelve , as is conjectured , but were not missed till yesterday morning at eight . An express was sent off directly . I dear Elizabeth , George and our poor Lydia must have passed within ten miles of we . Colonel Forster gives we reason to expect George here soon . poor Lydia left a few lines for George wife , informing George wife of George and our poor Lydia intention . I must conclude , for I can not be long from I poor mother . I am afraid Elizabeth will not be able to make it out , but I hardly know what I have written . ” 
 
  Without allowing Elizabeth time for consideration , and scarcely knowing what Elizabeth felt , Elizabeth on finishing this letter instantly seized the other , and opening the other with the utmost impatience , read as follows : this letter had been written a day later than the conclusion of the first . 
 
  “ By this time , Elizabeth , Elizabeth have received I hurried letter ; I wish this letter may be more intelligible , but though not confined for time , I head is so bewildered that I can not answer for being coherent . Dearest Elizabeth , I hardly know what I would write , but I have bad news for Elizabeth , and bad news can not be delayed . Imprudent as the marriage between George and our poor Lydia would be , we are now anxious to be assured the marriage between George and our poor Lydia has taken place , for there is but too much reason to fear George and our poor Lydia are not gone to Scotland . Colonel Forster came yesterday , having left Brighton the day before , not many hours after An express . Though poor Lydia short letter to George wife gave them to understand that George and our poor Lydia were going to Gretna Green , something was dropped by Denny expressing Denny belief that George never intended to go there , or to marry poor Lydia at all , which was repeated to Colonel Forster . Colonel Forster did trace George and our poor Lydia easily to Clapham , but no further ; for on entering Clapham , George and our poor Lydia removed into a hackney coach , and dismissed the chaise that brought George and our poor Lydia from Epsom . All that is known after this is , that George and our poor Lydia were seen to continue the London road . I know not what to think . After making every possible enquiry on that side London , Colonel Forster came on into Hertfordshire , anxiously renewing them at all the turnpikes , and at the inns in Barnet and Hatfield , but without any success — no such people had been seen to pass through . With the kindest concern Colonel Forster came on to Longbourn , and broke Colonel Forster apprehensions to us in a manner most creditable to Colonel Forster heart . I am sincerely grieved for Colonel Forster and George wife , but no one can throw any blame on George and our poor Lydia . Our distress , I dear Elizabeth , is very great . I father and mother believe the worst , but I can not think so ill of George . Many circumstances might make it more eligible for George and our poor Lydia to be married privately in town than to pursue George and our poor Lydia first plan ; and even if George could form such a design against a young woman of poor Lydia connections , which is not likely , can I suppose a young woman of poor Lydia connections , which is not likely so lost to everything ? Impossible ! I grieve to find , however , that Colonel Forster is not disposed to depend upon George and our poor Lydia marriage ; Colonel Forster shook Colonel Forster head when I expressed I hopes , and said Colonel Forster feared George was not a man to be trusted . Our poor mother is really ill , and keeps Our poor mother room . Could Our poor mother exert Our poor mother , it would be better ; but exert is not to be expected . And as to I father , I never in I life saw I father so affected . Poor Kitty has anger for having concealed George and our poor Lydia attachment ; but as it was a matter of confidence , one can not wonder . I am truly glad , dearest Elizabeth , that Elizabeth have been spared something of these distressing scenes ; but now , as the first shock is over , shall I own that I long for Elizabeth return ? I am not so selfish , however , as to press for Elizabeth return , if inconvenient . Adieu ! I take up I pen again to do what I have just told Elizabeth I would not ; but circumstances are such that I can not help earnestly begging Elizabeth to come here as soon as possible . I know I dear uncle and aunt so well , that I am not afraid of requesting it , though I have still something more to ask of the former . I father is going to London with Colonel Forster instantly , to try to discover poor Lydia . What I father means to do I am sure I know not ; but I father excessive distress will not allow I father to pursue any measure in the best and safest way , and Colonel Forster is obliged to be at Brighton again to - morrow evening . In such an exigence , I dear uncle advice and assistance would be everything in the world ; I dear uncle will immediately comprehend what I must feel , and I rely upon I dear uncle goodness . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! where , where is I uncle ? ” cried Elizabeth , darting from Elizabeth seat as Elizabeth finished the letter , in eagerness to follow I dear uncle , without losing a moment of the time so precious ; but as Elizabeth reached the door the door was opened by a servant , and Fitzwilliam appeared . Elizabeth pale face and impetuous manner made Fitzwilliam start , and before Fitzwilliam could recover Fitzwilliam to speak , Elizabeth , hastily exclaimed , “ Elizabeth beg Fitzwilliam pardon , but Elizabeth must leave Fitzwilliam . Elizabeth must find Edward this moment , on business that can not be delayed ; Elizabeth have not an instant to lose . ” 
 
  “ Good God ! what is the matter ? ” cried Fitzwilliam , with more feeling than politeness ; then recollecting Fitzwilliam , “ Fitzwilliam will not detain Elizabeth a minute ; but let Fitzwilliam , or let a servant go after George and our poor Lydia . Elizabeth are not well enough ; Elizabeth can not go Elizabeth . ” 
 
  Elizabeth hesitated , but Elizabeth knees trembled under Elizabeth and Elizabeth felt how little would be gained by Elizabeth attempting to pursue George and our poor Lydia . Calling back a servant , therefore , Elizabeth commissioned a servant , though in so breathless an accent as made Elizabeth almost unintelligible , to fetch a servant master and mistress home instantly . 
 
  On a servant quitting the room Elizabeth sat down , unable to support Elizabeth , and looking so miserably ill , that it was impossible for Fitzwilliam to leave Elizabeth , or to refrain from saying , in a tone of gentleness and commiseration , “ Let Fitzwilliam call Elizabeth maid . Is there nothing Elizabeth could take to give Elizabeth present relief ? A glass of wine ; shall Fitzwilliam get Elizabeth one ? Elizabeth are very ill . ” 
 
  “ No , Elizabeth thank Fitzwilliam , ” Elizabeth replied , endeavouring to recover Elizabeth . “ There is nothing the matter with Elizabeth . Elizabeth am quite well ; Elizabeth am only distressed by some dreadful news which Elizabeth have just received from Longbourn . ” 
 
  Elizabeth burst into tears as Elizabeth alluded to some dreadful news which Elizabeth have just received from Longbourn , and for a few minutes could not speak another word . Fitzwilliam , in wretched suspense , could only say something indistinctly of Fitzwilliam concern , and observe Elizabeth in compassionate silence . At length Elizabeth spoke again . “ Elizabeth have just had a letter from Jane , with such dreadful news . such dreadful news can not be concealed from anyone . poor Lydia has left all poor Lydia friends — has eloped ; has thrown poor Lydia into the power of — of George . They are gone off together from Brighton . Fitzwilliam know George too well to doubt the rest . poor Lydia has no money , no connections , nothing that can tempt George to — poor Lydia is lost for ever . ” Fitzwilliam Fitzwilliam was fixed in astonishment . “ When Elizabeth consider , ” Elizabeth added in a yet more agitated voice , “ that Elizabeth might have prevented it ! I who knew what George was . Had Elizabeth but explained some part of it only — some part of what Elizabeth learnt , to Elizabeth own family ! Had George character been known , this could not have happened . But it is all — all too late now . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam am grieved indeed , ” cried Fitzwilliam ; “ grieved — shocked . But is it certain — absolutely certain ? ” 
 
  “ Oh , yes ! George and our poor Lydia left Brighton together on last night , and were traced almost to London , but not beyond ; George and our poor Lydia are certainly not gone to Scotland . ” 
 
  “ And what has been done , what has been attempted , to recover poor Lydia ? ” 
 
  “ I father is gone to London , and Jane has written to beg I uncle ’s immediate assistance ; and we shall be off , Elizabeth hope , in half - an - hour . But nothing can be done — Elizabeth know very well that nothing can be done . How is such a man to be worked on ? How are such a man even to be discovered ? I have not the smallest hope . It is every way horrible ! ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam shook Fitzwilliam head in silent acquiescence . 
 
  “ When Elizabeth eyes were opened to George character — Oh ! had Elizabeth known what Elizabeth ought , what Elizabeth dared to do ! But Elizabeth knew not — Elizabeth was afraid of doing too much . Wretched , wretched mistake ! ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam made no answer . Fitzwilliam seemed scarcely to hear Elizabeth , and was walking up and down the room in earnest meditation , Fitzwilliam brow contracted , Fitzwilliam air gloomy . Elizabeth soon observed , and instantly understood it . Elizabeth power was sinking ; everything must sink under such a proof of family weakness , such an assurance of the deepest disgrace . Elizabeth could neither wonder nor condemn , but the belief of George self - conquest brought nothing consolatory to Elizabeth bosom , afforded no palliation of Elizabeth distress . the belief of George self - conquest was , on the contrary , exactly calculated to make Elizabeth understand Elizabeth own wishes ; and never had Elizabeth so honestly felt that Elizabeth could have loved George , as now , when all love must be vain . 
 
  But self , though self would intrude , could not engross Elizabeth . poor Lydia — the humiliation , the misery Elizabeth was bringing on them all , soon swallowed up every private care ; and covering Elizabeth face with Elizabeth handkerchief , Elizabeth was soon lost to everything else ; and , after a pause of several minutes , was only recalled to a sense of Elizabeth situation by the voice of Elizabeth companion , who , in a manner which , though it spoke compassion , spoke likewise restraint , said , “ I am afraid Elizabeth have been long desiring I absence , nor have I anything to plead in excuse of I stay , but real , though unavailing concern . Would to Heaven that anything could be either said or done on I part that might offer consolation to such distress ! But I will not torment Elizabeth with vain wishes , which may seem purposely to ask for Elizabeth thanks . This unfortunate affair will , I fear , prevent I sister ’s having the pleasure of seeing Elizabeth at Pemberley to - day . ” 
 
  “ Oh , yes . Be so kind as to apologise for us to Georgiana . Say that urgent business calls us home immediately . Conceal the unhappy truth as long as it is possible , Elizabeth know it can not be long . ” 
 
  I readily assured Elizabeth of his secrecy ; again expressed his sorrow for Elizabeth distress , wished it a happier conclusion than there was at present reason to hope , and leaving his compliments for Elizabeth relations , with only one serious , parting look , went away . 
 
  As I quitted the room , Elizabeth felt how improbable it was that George and our poor Lydia should ever see each other again on such terms of cordiality as had marked George and our poor Lydia several meetings in Hertfordshire ; and as Elizabeth threw a retrospective glance over the whole of George and our poor Lydia acquaintance , so full of contradictions and varieties , sighed at the perverseness of those feelings which would now have promoted George and our poor Lydia acquaintance , so full of contradictions and varieties continuance , and would formerly have rejoiced in George and our poor Lydia acquaintance , so full of contradictions and varieties termination . 
 
  If gratitude and esteem are good foundations of affection , Elizabeth ’s change of sentiment will be neither improbable nor faulty . But if otherwise — if regard springing from such sources is unreasonable or unnatural , in comparison of what is so often described as arising on a first interview with its object , and even before two words have been exchanged , nothing can be said in Elizabeth defence , except that Elizabeth had given somewhat of a trial to the latter method in Elizabeth partiality for George , and that the latter method ill success might , perhaps , authorise Elizabeth to seek the other less interesting mode of attachment . Be that as it may , Elizabeth saw George go with regret ; and in this early example of what poor Lydia infamy must produce , found additional anguish as poor Lydia reflected on that wretched business . Never , since reading Jane ’s second letter , had poor Lydia entertained a hope of George ’s meaning to marry poor Lydia . No one but Jane , poor Lydia thought , could flatter Jane with such an expectation . Surprise was the least of poor Lydia feelings on this development . While the contents of the first letter remained in poor Lydia mind , poor Lydia was all surprise — all astonishment that George should marry a girl whom it was impossible George could marry for money ; and how poor Lydia could ever have attached George had appeared incomprehensible . But now it was all too natural . For such an attachment as this Jane might have sufficient charms ; and though Jane did not suppose poor Lydia to be deliberately engaging in an elopement without the intention of marriage , Jane had no difficulty in believing that neither poor Lydia virtue nor poor Lydia understanding would preserve poor Lydia from falling an easy prey . 
 
  Jane had never perceived , while the regiment was in Hertfordshire , that poor Lydia had any partiality for George ; but Jane was convinced that poor Lydia wanted only encouragement to attach poor Lydia to anybody . Sometimes one officer , sometimes another , had been poor Lydia favourite , as their attentions raised their in poor Lydia opinion . poor Lydia affections had continually been fluctuating but never without an object . The mischief of neglect and mistaken indulgence towards such a girl — oh ! how acutely did poor Lydia now feel The mischief of neglect and mistaken indulgence towards such a girl ! 
 
  poor Lydia was wild to be at home — to hear , to see , to be upon the spot to share with Jane in the cares that must now fall wholly upon poor Lydia , in a family so deranged , a father absent , Our poor mother incapable of exertion , and requiring constant attendance ; and though almost persuaded that nothing could be done for poor Lydia , I dear uncle interference seemed of the utmost importance , and till I dear uncle entered the room poor Lydia impatience was severe . George and our poor Lydia had hurried back in alarm , supposing by a servant account that George and our poor Lydia niece was taken suddenly ill ; but satisfying George and our poor Lydia instantly on that head , poor Lydia eagerly communicated the cause of George and our poor Lydia summons , reading two letters from Jane at once aloud , and dwelling on the postscript of the last with trembling energy . — Though poor Lydia had never been a favourite with George and our poor Lydia , George and our poor Lydia could not but be deeply afflicted . Not poor Lydia , but all were concerned in it ; and after the first exclamations of surprise and horror , Edward promised every assistance in Edward power . Elizabeth , though expecting no less , thanked Edward with tears of gratitude ; and George and our poor Lydia being actuated by one spirit , everything relating to George and our poor Lydia journey was speedily settled . George and our poor Lydia were to be off as soon as possible . “ But what is to be done about Pemberley ? ” cried Madeline . “ John told George and our poor Lydia Fitzwilliam was here when Elizabeth sent for George and our poor Lydia ; was it so ? ” 
 
  “ Yes ; and Elizabeth told John George and our poor Lydia should not be able to keep George and our poor Lydia engagement . That is all settled . ” 
 
  “ That is all settled ; ” repeated Elizabeth , as Elizabeth ran into Elizabeth room to prepare . “ And are they upon such terms as for poor Lydia to disclose the real truth ? Oh , that Elizabeth knew how it was ! ” 
 
  But wishes were vain , or at least could only serve to amuse Elizabeth in the hurry and confusion of the following hour . Had Elizabeth been at leisure to be idle , Elizabeth would have remained certain that all employment was impossible to one so wretched as Elizabeth ; but Elizabeth had Elizabeth share of business as well as Elizabeth aunt , and amongst the rest there were notes to be written to all their friends at Lambton , with false excuses for George and our poor Lydia sudden departure . An hour , however , saw the whole completed ; and Edward meanwhile having settled Edward account at the inn , nothing remained to be done but to go ; and Elizabeth , after all the misery of yesterday morning , found Elizabeth , in a shorter space of time than Elizabeth could have supposed , seated in the carriage , and on the road to Longbourn . 
 Chapter 
 
  “ Elizabeth uncle have been thinking it over again , Elizabeth , ” said Elizabeth uncle , as they drove from the town ; “ and really , upon serious consideration , Elizabeth uncle am much more inclined than Elizabeth uncle was to judge as Elizabeth eldest sister does on the matter . It appears to Elizabeth uncle so very unlikely that any young man should form such a design against a girl who is by no means unprotected or friendless , and who was actually staying in any young man colonel ’s family , that Elizabeth uncle am strongly inclined to hope the best . Could any young man expect that Elizabeth eldest sister friends would not step forward ? Could any young man expect to be noticed again by the regiment , after such an affront to Colonel Forster ? any young man temptation is not adequate to the risk ! ” 
 
  “ Do Elizabeth uncle really think so ? ” cried Elizabeth , brightening up for a moment . 
 
  “ Upon Elizabeth uncle word , ” said Elizabeth uncle , “ Elizabeth uncle begin to be of Elizabeth uncle opinion . It is really too great a violation of decency , honour , and interest , for any young man to be guilty of . Elizabeth uncle can not think so very ill of any young man . Can you Elizabeth , Elizabeth , so wholly give any young man up , as to believe any young man capable of it ? ” 
 
  “ Not , perhaps , of neglecting any young man own interest ; but of every other neglect Elizabeth can believe any young man capable . If , indeed , it should be so ! But Elizabeth dare not hope it . Why should the fugitives not go on to Scotland if that had been the case ? ” 
 
  “ In the first place , ” replied Elizabeth uncle , “ there is no absolute proof that the fugitives are not gone to Scotland . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! but the fugitives removing from the chaise into a hackney coach is such a presumption ! And , besides , no traces of the fugitives were to be found on the Barnet road . ” 
 
  “ Well , then — supposing the fugitives to be in London . the fugitives may be there , though for the purpose of concealment , for no more exceptional purpose . It is not likely that money should be very abundant on either side ; and it might strike the fugitives that the fugitives could be more economically , though less expeditiously , married in London than in Scotland . ” 
 
  “ But why all this secrecy ? Why any fear of detection ? Why must the fugitives marriage be private ? Oh , no , no — be is not likely . any young man most particular friend , you see by Jane ’s account , was persuaded of any young man never intending to marry Jane ’s . any young man will never marry a woman without some money . any young man can not afford some money . And what claims has Lydia — what attraction has Lydia beyond youth , health , and good humour that could make any young man , for Lydia sake , forego every chance of benefiting any young man by marrying well ? As to what restraint the apprehensions of disgrace in the corps might throw on a dishonourable elopement with Lydia , Elizabeth uncle am not able to judge ; for Elizabeth uncle know nothing of the effects that such a step might produce . But as to Elizabeth other objection , Elizabeth am afraid Elizabeth other objection will hardly hold good . Lydia has no brothers to step forward ; and any young man might imagine , from Elizabeth father ’s behaviour , from Elizabeth father ’s indolence and the little attention Elizabeth father ’s has ever seemed to give to what was going forward in any young man colonel ’s family , that Elizabeth father ’s would do as little , and think as little about it , as any father could do , in such a matter . ” 
 
  “ But can Elizabeth think that Lydia is so lost to everything but love of any young man as to consent to live with any young man on any terms other than marriage ? ” 
 
  “ It does seem , and it is most shocking indeed , ” replied Elizabeth , with tears in Elizabeth eyes , “ that a sister ’s sense of decency and virtue in such a point should admit of doubt . But , really , Elizabeth know not what to say . Perhaps Elizabeth am not doing Lydia justice . But Lydia is very young ; Lydia has never been taught to think on serious subjects ; and for the last half - year , nay , for a twelvemonth — Lydia has been given up to nothing but amusement and vanity . Lydia has been allowed to dispose of Lydia time in the most idle and frivolous manner , and to adopt any opinions that came in Lydia way . Since the — — shire were first quartered in Meryton , nothing but love , flirtation , and officers have been in Lydia head . Lydia has been doing everything in Lydia power by thinking and talking on the subject , to give greater — what shall Elizabeth call it ? susceptibility to Lydia feelings ; which are naturally lively enough . And we all know that any young man has every charm of person and address that can captivate a woman . ” 
 
  “ But Elizabeth see that Jane ’s , ” said Elizabeth aunt , “ does not think so very ill of any young man as to believe any young man capable of the attempt . ” 
 
  “ Of whom does Jane ’s ever think ill ? And who is there , whatever might be the fugitives former conduct , that Jane ’s would think capable of such an attempt , till the fugitives former conduct were proved against the fugitives ? But Jane ’s knows , as well as Elizabeth do , what any young man really is . We both know that any young man has been profligate in every sense of the word ; that any young man has neither integrity nor honour ; that any young man is as false and deceitful as any young man is insinuating . ” 
 
  “ And do Elizabeth really know all this ? ” cried Elizabeth uncle . 
 
  “ Elizabeth do indeed , ” replied Elizabeth , colouring . “ Elizabeth told Elizabeth uncle , the other day , of any young man infamous behaviour to Fitzwilliam ; and Elizabeth uncle Elizabeth uncle , when last at Longbourn , heard in what manner any young man spoke of Fitzwilliam Fitzwilliam . And there are other circumstances which Elizabeth am not at liberty — which it is not worth while to relate ; but any young man lies about the whole Pemberley family are endless . From what any young man said of Georgiana Elizabeth was thoroughly prepared to see a proud , reserved , disagreeable girl . Yet any young man knew to the contrary any young man . any young man must know that Georgiana was as amiable and unpretending as we have found Georgiana . ” 
 
  “ But does Lydia know nothing of this ? can Lydia be ignorant of what Elizabeth and Jane ’s seem so well to understand ? ” 
 
  “ Oh , yes!—that , be is the worst of all . Till Elizabeth was in Kent , and saw so much both of Fitzwilliam and Fitzwilliam relation Fitzwilam , Elizabeth was ignorant of the truth Elizabeth . And when Elizabeth returned home , the — — shire was to leave Meryton in a week or fortnight ’s time . As that was the case , neither Jane ’s , nor Elizabeth , thought it necessary to make Elizabeth and Jane ’s knowledge public ; for of what use could it apparently be to any one , that the good opinion which all the neighbourhood had of any young man should then be overthrown ? And even when it was settled that Lydia should go with Colonel Forster , the necessity of opening Lydia eyes to any young man character never occurred to Elizabeth . That Lydia could be in any danger from the deception never entered Elizabeth head . That such a consequence as this could ensue , Elizabeth uncle may easily believe , was far enough from Elizabeth thoughts . ” 
 
  “ When they all removed to Brighton , therefore , Elizabeth had no reason , Elizabeth uncle suppose , to believe they all fond of each other ? ” 
 
  “ Not the slightest . Elizabeth can remember no symptom of affection on either side ; and had anything of the kind been perceptible , Elizabeth uncle must be aware that ours is not a family on which anything of the kind could be thrown away . When first any young man entered the corps , Elizabeth eldest sister was ready enough to admire any young man ; but so we all were . Every girl in or near any young man was out of Every girl in or near any young man senses about any young man for the first two months ; but any young man never distinguished Every girl in or near any young man by any particular attention ; and , consequently , after a moderate period of extravagant and wild admiration , Every girl in or near any young man fancy for any young man gave way , and others of the regiment , who treated Every girl in or near any young man with more distinction , again became Every girl in or near any young man favourites . ” 
 
  It may be easily believed , that however little of novelty could be added to the fugitives fears , hopes , and conjectures , on the subject , by its repeated discussion , no other could detain the fugitives from the subject long , during the whole of the journey . From Elizabeth ’s thoughts it was never absent . Fixed there by the keenest of all anguish , self - reproach , Elizabeth could find no interval of ease or forgetfulness . 
 
  They travelled as expeditiously as possible , and , sleeping one night on the road , reached Longbourn by dinner time the next day . It was a comfort to Elizabeth to consider that Jane ’s could not have been wearied by long expectations . 
 
  The little Gardiners , attracted by the sight of a chaise , were standing on the steps of the house as The little Gardiners entered the paddock ; and , when the carriage drove up to the door , the joyful surprise that lighted up The little Gardiners faces , and displayed itself over The little Gardiners whole bodies , in a variety of capers and frisks , was the first pleasing earnest of The little Gardiners welcome . 
 
  Elizabeth jumped out ; and , after giving each of The little Gardiners a hasty kiss , hurried into the vestibule , where Jane ’s Jane ’s mother ’s apartment , immediately met Elizabeth . 
 
  Elizabeth , as Elizabeth affectionately embraced Jane ’s , whilst tears filled the eyes of Elizabeth and Jane ’s , lost not a moment in asking whether anything had been heard of the fugitives . 
 
  “ Not yet , ” replied Jane ’s . “ But now that Jane ’s dear uncle is come , Jane ’s hope everything will be well . ” 
 
  “ Is Jane ’s father in town ? ” 
 
  “ Yes , Elizabeth father ’s went on Tuesday , as Elizabeth uncle wrote Elizabeth uncle word . ” 
 
  “ And have Elizabeth heard from Elizabeth father ’s often ? ” 
 
  “ We have heard only twice . Elizabeth father ’s wrote Elizabeth a few lines on Wednesday to say that Elizabeth father ’s had arrived in safety , and to give Elizabeth Elizabeth father ’s directions , which Elizabeth particularly begged Elizabeth father ’s to do . Elizabeth father ’s merely added that Elizabeth father ’s should not write again till Elizabeth father ’s had something of importance to mention . ” 
 
  “ And Jane ’s mother — how is Elizabeth eldest sister ? How are Elizabeth all ? ” 
 
  “ Jane ’s mother is tolerably well , Elizabeth uncle trust ; though Elizabeth eldest sister spirits are greatly shaken . Elizabeth eldest sister is up stairs and will have great satisfaction in seeing the others . Elizabeth eldest sister does not yet leave Elizabeth eldest sister dressing - room . Mary and Kitty , thank Heaven , are quite well . ” 
 
  “ But Jane ’s — how are Jane ’s ? ” cried Elizabeth . “ Jane ’s look pale . How much Jane ’s must have gone through ! ” Elizabeth eldest sister Elizabeth eldest sister , however , assured Elizabeth of Elizabeth eldest sister being perfectly well ; and their conversation , which had been passing while Elizabeth uncle and Elizabeth uncle were engaged with Elizabeth uncle and Elizabeth uncle children , was now put an end to by the approach of the whole party . Jane ’s ran to Jane ’s uncle and aunt , and welcomed and thanked Jane ’s uncle and aunt , with alternate smiles and tears . 
 
  When the whole party were all in the drawing - room , the questions which Elizabeth had already asked were of course repeated by the others , and the others soon found that Jane ’s had no intelligence to give . The sanguine hope of good , however , which the benevolence of Jane ’s heart suggested had not yet deserted Jane ’s ; Jane ’s still expected that it would all end well , and that every morning would bring some letter , either from Lydia or Lydia father , to explain their proceedings , and , perhaps , announce their marriage . 
 
  Mother , to whose apartment the whole party repaired , after a few minutes ’ conversation together , received the whole party exactly as might be expected ; with tears and lamentations of regret , invectives against the villainous conduct of any young man , and complaints of Mother , to whose apartment the whole party repaired , after a few minutes ’ conversation together , own sufferings and ill - usage ; blaming everybody but any young man . 
 
  “ If Elizabeth had been able , ” said Elizabeth , “ to carry Elizabeth point in going to Brighton , with all Elizabeth family , this would not have happened ; but poor dear Lydia had nobody to take care of Lydia . Why did the Forsters ever let Lydia go out of the Forsters sight ? Elizabeth uncle am sure there was some great neglect or other on the Forsters side , for Lydia is not the kind of girl to do such a thing if Lydia had been well looked after . Elizabeth always thought the Forsters were very unfit to have the charge of Lydia ; but Elizabeth was overruled , as Elizabeth always am . Lydia ! And now here ’s Elizabeth father ’s gone away , and Elizabeth know any young man will fight any young man , wherever any young man meets any young man and then any young man will be killed , and what is to become of us all ? The Collinses will turn Elizabeth and Jane ’s out before any young man is cold in any young man grave , and if Elizabeth uncle are not kind to Elizabeth and Jane ’s , Elizabeth uncle , Elizabeth do not know what Elizabeth and Jane ’s shall do . ” 
 
  the whole party exclaimed against such terrific ideas ; and Elizabeth uncle , after general assurances of Elizabeth uncle affection for Lydia and all Lydia family , told Lydia that Elizabeth uncle meant to be in London the very next day , and would assist Elizabeth father ’s in every endeavour for recovering Lydia . 
 
  “ Do not give way to useless alarm , ” added Elizabeth uncle ; “ though it is right to be prepared for the worst , there is no occasion to look on it as certain . It is not quite a week since the fugitives left Brighton . In a few days more we may gain some news of the fugitives ; and till we know that the fugitives are not married , and have no design of marrying , do not let we give the matter over as lost . As soon as Elizabeth uncle get to town Elizabeth uncle shall go to Elizabeth uncle brother , and make any young man come home with Elizabeth uncle to Gracechurch Street ; and then we may consult together as to what is to be done . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! Lydia dear brother , ” replied Lydia , “ that is exactly what Lydia could most wish for . And now do , when Elizabeth uncle get to town , find the fugitives out , wherever the fugitives may be ; and if the fugitives are not married already , make the fugitives marry . And as for wedding clothes , do not let the fugitives wait for wedding clothes , but tell Lydia Lydia shall have as much money as Lydia chooses to buy wedding clothes , after the fugitives are married . And , above all , keep Elizabeth father ’s from fighting . Tell Elizabeth father ’s what a dreadful state Elizabeth am in , that Elizabeth am frighted out of Elizabeth wits — and have such tremblings , such flutterings , all over Elizabeth — such spasms in Elizabeth side and pains in Elizabeth head , and such beatings at heart , that Elizabeth can get no rest by night nor by day . And tell Elizabeth dear Lydia not to give any directions about Lydia clothes till Lydia has seen Elizabeth uncle , for Lydia does not know which are the best warehouses . Oh , Elizabeth uncle , how kind Elizabeth uncle are ! Elizabeth know Elizabeth uncle will contrive it all . ” 
 
  But Elizabeth uncle , though Elizabeth uncle assured Lydia again of Elizabeth uncle earnest endeavours in the cause , could not avoid recommending moderation to Lydia , as well in Lydia hopes as Lydia fear ; and after talking with Lydia in this manner till dinner was on the table , the whole party left Lydia to vent all Lydia feelings on the housekeeper , who attended in the absence of the housekeeper , who attended in the absence of daughters . 
 
  Though Lydia brother and sister were persuaded that there was no real occasion for such a seclusion from any young man colonel ’s family , Lydia brother and sister did not attempt to oppose such a seclusion , for Lydia brother and sister knew that Lydia had not prudence enough to hold Lydia tongue before the servants , while Lydia brother and sister waited at table , and judged it better that one only of any young man colonel ’s family , and the one whom Lydia brother and sister could most trust should comprehend all Lydia fears and solicitude on the subject . 
 
  In the dining - room they were soon joined by Mary and Kitty , who had been too busily engaged in Mary and Kitty , who had been too busily engaged in separate apartments to make Mary and Kitty , who had been too busily engaged in appearance before . One came from One books , and the other from Kitty toilette . The faces of Mary and Kitty , who had been too busily engaged in , however , were tolerably calm ; and no change was visible in either , except that the loss of Elizabeth eldest sister , or the anger which Kitty had Kitty incurred in this business , had given more of fretfulness than usual to the accents of Kitty . As for Mary , Mary was mistress enough of Mary to whisper to Elizabeth , with a countenance of grave reflection , soon after they were seated at table : 
 
  “ This is a most unfortunate affair , and will probably be much talked of . But we must stem the tide of malice , and pour into the wounded bosoms of each other the balm of sisterly consolation . ” 
 
  Then , perceiving in Elizabeth no inclination of replying , Mary added , “ Unhappy as the event must be for Lydia , we may draw from the event this useful lesson : that loss of virtue in a female is irretrievable ; that one false step involves a female in endless ruin ; that a female reputation is no less brittle than a female reputation is beautiful ; and that a female can not be too much guarded in a female behaviour towards the undeserving of the other sex . ” 
 
  Elizabeth lifted up Elizabeth eyes in amazement , but was too much oppressed to make any reply . Mary , however , continued to console Mary with such kind of moral extractions from the evil before them . 
 
  In the afternoon , Elizabeth uncle and Elizabeth uncle were able to be for half - an - hour by Elizabeth uncle and Elizabeth uncle ; and Elizabeth instantly availed Elizabeth of the opportunity of making many enquiries , which Jane ’s was equally eager to satisfy . After joining in general lamentations over the dreadful sequel of this event , which Elizabeth considered as all but certain , and Miss Bennet could not assert to be wholly impossible , Jane ’s continued the subject , by saying , “ But tell Elizabeth uncle all and everything about this event which Elizabeth uncle have not already heard . Give Elizabeth uncle further particulars . What did Colonel Forster say ? Had the fugitives no apprehension of anything before the fugitives marriage took place ? the fugitives must have seen the fugitives together for ever . ” 
 
  “ Colonel Forster did own that Colonel Forster had often suspected some partiality , especially on Lydia ’s side , but nothing to give Colonel Forster any alarm . Elizabeth am so grieved for Colonel Forster ! Colonel Forster behaviour was attentive and kind to the utmost . Colonel Forster was coming to us , in order to assure us of Colonel Forster concern , before Colonel Forster had any idea of the fugitives not being gone to Scotland : when any idea of the fugitives not being gone to Scotland first got abroad , any idea of the fugitives not being gone to Scotland hastened Colonel Forster journey . ” 
 
  “ And was Denny convinced that any young man would not marry ? Did Denny know of the fugitives intending to go off ? Had Colonel Forster seen Denny Denny ? ” 
 
  “ Yes ; but , when questioned by Denny , Denny denied knowing anything of the fugitives plans , and would not give Denny real opinion about the fugitives plans . Denny did not repeat Denny persuasion of the fugitives not marrying — and from that , Elizabeth am inclined to hope , Denny might have been misunderstood before . ” 
 
  “ And till Colonel Forster came Colonel Forster , not one of the others entertained a doubt , Elizabeth uncle suppose , of the fugitives being really married ? ” 
 
  “ How was it possible that such an idea should enter Elizabeth and Jane ’s brains ? Elizabeth felt a little uneasy — a little fearful of Elizabeth sister ’s happiness with any young man in marriage , because Elizabeth knew that any young man conduct had not been always quite right . Elizabeth father and mother knew nothing of knew ; Elizabeth father and mother only felt how imprudent a match it must be . Elizabeth then owned , with a very natural triumph on knowing more than the rest of Elizabeth and Jane ’s , that in Lydia ’s last letter Lydia had prepared Lydia for such a step . Lydia had known , it seems , of the fugitives being in love with each other , many weeks . ” 
 
  “ But not before the fugitives went to Brighton ? ” 
 
  “ No , Elizabeth believe not . ” 
 
  “ And did Colonel Forster appear to think well of any young man any young man ? Does Colonel Forster know any young man real character ? ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth must confess that Colonel Forster did not speak so well of any young man as Colonel Forster formerly did . Colonel Forster believed any young man to be imprudent and extravagant . And since this sad affair has taken place , it is said that any young man left Meryton greatly in debt ; but Elizabeth hope left may be false . ” 
 
  “ Oh , Jane ’s , had we been less secret , had we told what we knew of any young man , this could not have happened ! ” 
 
  “ Perhaps it would have been better , ” replied Jane ’s sister . “ But to expose the former faults of any person without knowing what any person present feelings were , seemed unjustifiable . We acted with the best intentions . ” 
 
  “ Could Colonel Forster repeat the particulars of Lydia ’s note to Elizabeth eldest sister ? ” 
 
  “ Colonel Forster brought Lydia ’s note to Elizabeth eldest sister with Colonel Forster for us to see . ” 
 
  Jane ’s then took Lydia ’s note to Elizabeth eldest sister from Jane ’s pocket - book , and gave Lydia ’s note to Elizabeth eldest sister to Elizabeth . These were the contents : 
 
  “ Lydia dear Harriet , 
  “ Lydia dear Harriet will laugh when Lydia dear Harriet know where Lydia am gone , and Lydia can not help laughing Lydia at Lydia dear Harriet surprise to - morrow morning , as soon as Lydia am missed . Lydia am going to Gretna Green , and if Lydia dear Harriet can not guess with who , Lydia shall think Lydia dear Harriet a simpleton , for there is but one man in the world Lydia love , and but one man in the world Lydia love is an angel . Lydia should never be happy without but one man in the world Lydia love , so think it no harm to be off . Lydia dear Harriet need not send them word at Longbourn of Lydia going , if Lydia dear Harriet do not like word at Longbourn of Lydia going , for it will make the surprise the greater , when Lydia write to them and sign Lydia name ‘ Lydia . ’ What a good joke it will be ! Lydia can hardly write for laughing . Pray make Lydia excuses to Pratt for not keeping Lydia engagement , and dancing with Pratt to - night . Tell Pratt Lydia hope Pratt will excuse Lydia when Pratt knows all ; and tell Pratt Lydia will dance with Pratt at the next ball we meet , with great pleasure . Lydia shall send for Lydia clothes when Lydia get to Longbourn ; but Lydia wish Lydia dear Harriet would tell Sally to mend a great slit in Lydia worked muslin gown before Lydia clothes are packed up . Good - bye . Give Lydia love to Colonel Forster . Lydia hope Elizabeth uncle will drink to they good journey . 
 
  “ Elizabeth affectionate friend , 
  “ LYDIA BENNET . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! thoughtless , thoughtless Lydia ! ” cried Elizabeth when Elizabeth had finished Lydia ’s note to Elizabeth eldest sister . “ What a letter is Lydia ’s note to Elizabeth eldest sister , to be written at such a moment ! But at least Lydia ’s note to Elizabeth eldest sister shows that Lydia was serious on the subject of the fugitives journey . Whatever Colonel Forster might afterwards persuade Lydia to , it was not on Lydia side a scheme of infamy . Elizabeth father ’s ! how Elizabeth father ’s must have felt it ! ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth never saw anyone so shocked . Elizabeth father ’s could not speak a word for full ten minutes . Elizabeth eldest sister was taken ill immediately , and the whole house in such confusion ! ” 
 
  “ Oh ! Jane ’s , ” cried Elizabeth , “ was there a servant belonging to it who did not know the whole story before the end of the day ? ” 
 
  “ Jane ’s do not know . Jane ’s hope there was . But to be guarded at such a time is very difficult . Jane ’s mother was in hysterics , and though Jane ’s endeavoured to give Elizabeth eldest sister every assistance in Jane ’s power , Jane ’s am afraid Jane ’s did not do so much as Jane ’s might have done ! But the horror of what might possibly happen almost took from Jane ’s Jane ’s faculties . ” 
 
  “ Jane ’s attendance upon Elizabeth eldest sister has been too much for Jane ’s . Jane ’s do not look well . Oh that Elizabeth uncle had been with Jane ’s ! Jane ’s have had every care and anxiety upon Jane ’s alone . ” 
 
  “ Mary and Kitty have been very kind , and would have shared in every fatigue , Jane ’s am sure ; but Jane ’s did not think it right for either of Mary and Kitty . Kitty is slight and delicate ; and Mary studies so much , that Mary hours of repose should not be broken in on . Jane ’s aunt Phillips came to Longbourn on Tuesday , after Elizabeth father ’s went away ; and was so good as to stay till Thursday with Jane ’s . Jane ’s aunt Phillips was of great use and comfort to us all . And Lady Lucas has been very kind ; Lady Lucas walked here on Wednesday morning to condole with us , and offered Lady Lucas services , or any of Lady Lucas daughters ’ , if any of Lady Lucas daughters ’ should be of use to us . ” 
 
  “ Lady Lucas had better have stayed at home , ” cried Elizabeth ; “ perhaps Lady Lucas meant well , but , under such a misfortune as this , one can not see too little of one ’s neighbours . Assistance is impossible ; condolence insufferable . Let them triumph over us at a distance , and be satisfied . ” 
 
  Elizabeth eldest sister then proceeded to enquire into the measures which Elizabeth father ’s had intended to pursue , while in town , for the recovery of Elizabeth father ’s daughter . 
 
  “ Elizabeth father ’s meant Jane ’s believe , ” replied Jane ’s , “ to go to Epsom , the place where the fugitives last changed horses , see the postilions and try if anything could be made out from the postilions . Elizabeth father ’s principal object must be to discover the number of the hackney coach which took the fugitives from Clapham . the hackney coach which took the fugitives from Clapham had come with a fare from London ; and as Elizabeth father ’s thought that the circumstance of a gentleman and lady ’s removing from one carriage into another might be remarked Elizabeth father ’s meant to make enquiries at Clapham . If Elizabeth father ’s could anyhow discover at what house the coachman had before set down a fare from London , Elizabeth father ’s determined to make enquiries there , and hoped it might not be impossible to find out the stand and number of the hackney coach which took the fugitives from Clapham . Jane ’s do not know of any other designs that Elizabeth father ’s had formed ; but Elizabeth father ’s was in such a hurry to be gone , and Elizabeth father ’s spirits so greatly discomposed , that Jane ’s had difficulty in finding out even so much as this . ” 
 Chapter 
 
  The whole party were in hopes of a letter from Father the next morning , but the post came in without bringing a single line from Father . Father family knew Father to be , on all common occasions , a most negligent and dilatory correspondent ; but at such a time Father family had hoped for exertion . Father family were forced to conclude that Father had no pleasing intelligence to send ; but even of had Father family would have been glad to be certain . Father had waited only for the letters before Father set off . 
 
  When Father was gone , Father family were certain at least of receiving constant information of what was going on , and Father family uncle promised , at parting , to prevail on Father to return to Longbourn , as soon as Father could , to the great consolation of Father sister , who considered it as the only security for Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s not being killed in a duel . 
 
  Madeline and the children were to remain in Hertfordshire a few days longer , as the former thought the former presence might be serviceable to the former nieces . the former shared in the children attendance on Father , and was a great comfort to the children in the children hours of freedom . the children other aunt also visited the children frequently , and always , as the children other aunt said , with the design of cheering and heartening the children up — though , as the children other aunt never came without reporting some fresh instance of Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s extravagance or irregularity , the children other aunt seldom went away without leaving the children more dispirited than the children other aunt found the children . 
 
  All Meryton seemed striving to blacken Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s . Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s was declared to be in debt to every tradesman in the place , and Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s intrigues , all honoured with the title of seduction , had been extended into every tradesman ’s family . Everybody declared that Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s was the wickedest young man in the world ; and everybody began to find out that everybody had always distrusted the appearance of Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s goodness . Elizabeth , though Elizabeth did not credit above half of what was said , believed enough to make Elizabeth former assurance of Elizabeth ruin more certain ; and even Jane , who believed still less of Elizabeth ruin , became almost hopeless , more especially as the time was now come when , if yourself and Mother had gone to Scotland , which even Jane , who believed still less of Elizabeth ruin had never before entirely despaired of , yourself and Mother must in all probability have gained some news of yourself and Mother . 
 
  Father left Longbourn on Sunday ; on Tuesday Father wife received a letter from Father ; it told yourself and Mother that , on Father arrival , Father had immediately found out Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s , and persuaded Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s to come to Gracechurch Street ; that Father had been to Epsom and Clapham , before Father arrival , but without gaining any satisfactory information ; and that Father was now determined to enquire at all the principal hotels in town , as Father thought it possible yourself and Mother might have gone to one of all the principal hotels in town , on yourself and Mother first coming to London , before yourself and Mother procured lodgings . Father did not expect any success from enquire , but as Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s was eager in enquire , Father meant to assist Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s in pursuing enquire . Father added that Father seemed wholly disinclined at present to leave London and promised to write again very soon . There was also a postscript to this effect : 
 
  “ Father have written to Colonel Forster to desire Colonel Forster to find out , if possible , from some of Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s intimates in the regiment , whether Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s has any relations or connections who would be likely to know in what part of town Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s has now concealed Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s . If there were anyone that one could apply to with a probability of gaining such a clue as that , anyone that one could apply to with a probability of gaining such a clue as that might be of essential consequence . At present we have nothing to guide we . Colonel Forster will , Father dare say , do everything in Colonel Forster power to satisfy we on this head . But , on second thoughts , perhaps , Elizabeth could tell we what relations Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s has now living , better than any other person . ” 
 
  Elizabeth was at no loss to understand from whence this deference to Elizabeth authority proceeded ; but it was not in Elizabeth power to give any information of so satisfactory a nature as the compliment deserved . Elizabeth had never heard of Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s having had any relations , except a father and mother , both of whom had been dead many years . It was possible , however , that some of Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s companions in the — — shire might be able to give more information ; and though Elizabeth was not very sanguine in expecting it , the application was a something to look forward to . 
 
  Every day at Longbourn was now a day of anxiety ; but the most anxious part of each was when the post was expected . The arrival of letters was the grand object of every morning ’s impatience . Through letters , whatever of good or bad was to be told would be communicated , and every succeeding day was expected to bring some news of importance . 
 
  But before yourself and Mother heard again from Father , a letter arrived for yourself and Mother father , from a different quarter , from William Collins ; which , as even Jane , who believed still less of Elizabeth ruin had received directions to open all that came for even Jane , who believed still less of Elizabeth ruin in even Jane , who believed still less of Elizabeth ruin absence , even Jane , who believed still less of Elizabeth ruin accordingly read ; and Elizabeth , who knew what curiosities even Jane , who believed still less of Elizabeth ruin letters always were , looked over even Jane , who believed still less of Elizabeth ruin , and read a letter likewise . a letter was as follows : 
 
  “ Father , 
  “ Father feel Father called upon , by our relationship , and Father situation in life , to condole with Father on the grievous affliction Father are now suffering under , of which we were yesterday informed by a letter from Hertfordshire . Be assured , Father , that William Collins and Father sincerely sympathise with Father and all Father respectable family , in Father present distress , which must be of the bitterest kind , because proceeding from a cause which no time can remove . No arguments shall be wanting on Father part that can alleviate so severe a misfortune — or that may comfort Father , under a circumstance that must be of all others the most afflicting to a parent ’s mind . The death of Father daughter would have been a blessing in comparison of this . And it is the more to be lamented , because there is reason to suppose as Father dear Charlotte informs Father , that this licentiousness of behaviour in Father daughter has proceeded from a faulty degree of indulgence ; though , at the same time , for the consolation of yourself and Mother , Father am inclined to think that Father daughter own disposition must be naturally bad , or Father daughter could not be guilty of such an enormity , at so early an age . Howsoever that may be , Father are grievously to be pitied ; in which opinion Father am not only joined by William Collins , but likewise by Cathleen and Cathleen daughter , to whom Father have related the affair . Cathleen and Cathleen daughter , to whom Father have related the affair agree with Father in apprehending that this false step in one daughter will be injurious to the fortunes of all the others ; for who , as Cathleen Cathleen condescendingly says , will connect themselves with such a family ? And this consideration leads Father moreover to reflect , with augmented satisfaction , on a certain event of last November ; for had a certain event of last November been otherwise , Father must have been involved in all Father sorrow and disgrace . Let Father then advise Father , Father , to console Father as much as possible , to throw off Father unworthy child from Father affection for ever , and leave Father daughter to reap the fruits of Father daughter own heinous offense . 
 
  “ Father am , Father , etc . , etc . ” 
 
  Father did not write again till Father had received an answer from Colonel Forster ; and then Father had nothing of a pleasant nature to send . It was not known that Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s had a single relationship with whom Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s kept up any connection , and it was certain that Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s had no near one living . Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s former acquaintances had been numerous ; but since Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s had been in the regiment , it did not appear that Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s was on terms of particular friendship with any of Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s former acquaintances . There was no one , therefore , who could be pointed out as likely to give any news of Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s . And in the wretched state of Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s own finances , there was a very powerful motive for secrecy , in addition to Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s fear of discovery by Father daughter relations , for it had just transpired that Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s had left gaming debts behind Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s to a very considerable amount . Colonel Forster believed that more than a thousand pounds would be necessary to clear Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s expenses at Brighton . Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s owed a good deal in town , but Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s debts of honour were still more formidable . Father did not attempt to conceal these particulars from the Longbourn family . even Jane , who believed still less of Elizabeth ruin heard these particulars with horror . “ A gamester ! ” even Jane , who believed still less of Elizabeth ruin cried . “ This is wholly unexpected . even Jane , who believed still less of Elizabeth ruin had not an idea of This . ” 
 
  Father added in Father letter , that the children might expect to see Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s at home on the following day , which was Saturday . Rendered spiritless by the ill - success of all their endeavours , Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s had yielded to Colonel Forster entreaty that Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s would return to Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s family , and leave it to Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s to do whatever occasion might suggest to be advisable for continuing yourself and Mother pursuit . When Father was told of this , Father did not express so much satisfaction as Father children expected , considering what Father anxiety for Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s life had been before . 
 
  “ What , is Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s coming home , and without Father daughter ? ” Father cried . “ Sure Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s will not leave London before Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s has found yourself and Mother . Who is to fight Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s , and make Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s marry Father daughter , if Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s comes away ? ” 
 
  As Madeline began to wish to be at home , it was settled that Madeline and the children should go to London , at the same time Father sister , who considered it as the only security for husband ’s came from The coach . The coach , therefore , took Madeline and the children the first stage of Madeline and the children journey , and brought The coach master back to Longbourn . 
 
  Madeline went away in all the perplexity about Elizabeth and Elizabeth Derbyshire friend that had attended Elizabeth from that part of the world . Elizabeth Derbyshire friend that had attended Elizabeth from that part of the world name had never been voluntarily mentioned before Madeline and the children by Father daughter ; and the kind of half - expectation which Madeline had formed , of Madeline and the children being followed by a letter from Elizabeth Derbyshire friend that had attended Elizabeth from that part of the world , had ended in nothing . Elizabeth had received none since Elizabeth return that could come from Pemberley . 
 
  The present unhappy state of Longbourn rendered any other excuse for the lowness of Elizabeth spirits unnecessary ; nothing , therefore , could be fairly conjectured from that , though Elizabeth , who was by this time tolerably well acquainted with Elizabeth own feelings , was perfectly aware that , had Elizabeth known nothing of Elizabeth Derbyshire friend that had attended Elizabeth from that part of the world , Elizabeth could have borne the dread of Father daughter infamy somewhat better . It would have spared Elizabeth , Elizabeth thought , one sleepless night out of two . 
 
  When Father arrived , Father had all the appearance of Father usual philosophic composure . Father said as little as Father had ever been in the habit of saying ; made no mention of the business that had taken Father away , and it was some time before Father daughters had courage to speak of the business that had taken Father away . 
 
  It was not till the afternoon , when Father had joined the children at tea , that Elizabeth ventured to introduce the subject ; and then , on Elizabeth briefly expressing Elizabeth sorrow for what Father must have endured , Father replied , “ Say nothing of that . Who should suffer but Father ? It has been Father own doing , and Father ought to feel it . ” 
 
  “ Father must not be too severe upon Father , ” replied Elizabeth . 
 
  “ Elizabeth may well warn Elizabeth against such an evil . Human nature is so prone to fall into such an evil ! No , Elizabeth , let Father once in Father life feel how much Father have been to blame . Father am not afraid of being overpowered by the impression . the impression will pass away soon enough . ” 
 
  “ Do Elizabeth suppose yourself and Mother to be in London ? ” 
 
  “ Yes ; where else can yourself and Mother be so well concealed ? ” 
 
  “ And Father daughter used to want to go to London , ” added Kitty . 
 
  “ Father daughter is happy then , ” said Father daughter father drily ; “ and Father daughter residence there will probably be of some duration . ” 
 
  Then after a short silence Father continued : 
 
  “ Elizabeth , Father bear Father no ill - will for being justified in Father advice to Father daughter last May , which , considering the event , shows some greatness of mind . ” 
 
  yourself and Mother were interrupted by Miss Bennet , who came to fetch Father tea . 
 
  “ This is a parade , ” Father cried , “ which does one good ; This gives such an elegance to misfortune ! Another day Father will do the same ; Father will sit in Father library , in Father nightcap and powdering gown , and give as much trouble as Father can ; or , perhaps , Father may defer it till Elizabeth runs away . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth am not going to run away , Father , ” said Elizabeth fretfully . “ If Elizabeth should ever go to Brighton , Elizabeth would behave better than Father daughter . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth go to Brighton . Father would not trust Elizabeth so near Brighton as Eastbourne for fifty pounds ! No , Elizabeth , Father have at last learnt to be cautious , and Elizabeth will feel the effects of learnt . No officer is ever to enter into Father house again , nor even to pass through the village . Balls will be absolutely prohibited , unless Elizabeth stand up with one of Elizabeth sisters . And Elizabeth are never to stir out of doors till Elizabeth can prove that Elizabeth have spent ten minutes of every day in a rational manner . ” 
 
  Elizabeth , began to cry . 
 
  “ Well , well , ” said Father , “ do not make Elizabeth unhappy . If Elizabeth are a good girl for the next ten years , Father will take Elizabeth to a review at the end of the next ten years . ” 
 Chapter 
 
  Two days after Father ’s return , as Jane and Elizabeth were walking together in the shrubbery behind the house , Jane and Elizabeth saw the housekeeper coming towards Jane and Elizabeth , and , concluding that the housekeeper came to call Jane and Elizabeth to Jane and Elizabeth mother , went forward to meet the housekeeper ; but , instead of the expected summons , when Jane and Elizabeth approached the housekeeper , the housekeeper said to Miss Bennet , “ the housekeeper beg Miss Bennet pardon , Miss Bennet , for interrupting Miss Bennet , but the housekeeper was in hopes Miss Bennet might have got some good news from town , so the housekeeper took the liberty of coming to ask . Miss Bennet 
 
  Miss Bennet What do the housekeeper mean , Miss Bennet ? We have heard nothing from town . ” 
 
  “ Miss Bennet , ” cried Jane and Elizabeth mother , in great astonishment , “ do n’t Miss Bennet know there is an express come for master from Edward ? master has been here this half - hour , and master has had a letter . ” 
 
  Away ran Jane and Elizabeth , too eager to get in to have time for speech . Jane and Elizabeth ran through the vestibule into the breakfast - room ; from thence to the library ; Father ’s was in neither ; and Jane and Elizabeth were on the point of seeking Father ’s up stairs with Jane and Elizabeth mother , when Jane and Elizabeth were met by the butler , who said : 
 
  “ If Jane and Elizabeth are looking for the butler , who said : 
 
  “ If Jane and Elizabeth are looking for master , Jane and Elizabeth , Father ’s is walking towards the little copse . ” 
 
  Upon this information , Jane and Elizabeth instantly passed through the hall once more , and ran across the lawn after Jane and Elizabeth father , who was deliberately pursuing Father ’s way towards a small wood on one side of the paddock . 
 
  Jane , who was not so light nor so much in the habit of running as Elizabeth , soon lagged behind , while Elizabeth , panting for breath , came up with Father ’s , and eagerly cried out : 
 
  “ Oh , Father ’s , what news — what news ? Have Father ’s heard from Jane uncle ? ” 
 
  “ Yes Elizabeth have had a letter from master by express . ” 
 
  “ Well , and what news does a letter from master by express bring — good or bad ? ” 
 
  “ What is there of good to be expected ? ” said Father ’s , taking a letter from Father ’s pocket . “ But perhaps Elizabeth would like to read a letter . ” 
 
  Elizabeth impatiently caught a letter from Father ’s hand . Jane now came up . 
 
  “ Read a letter aloud , ” said Father ’s , “ for Father ’s hardly know Father ’s what a letter is about . ” 
 
  “ Gracechurch Street , Monday , August 2 . 
 
  “ Elizabeth dear Brother , 
  “ At last Elizabeth am able to send Elizabeth dear Brother some tidings of Elizabeth niece , and such as , upon the whole , Elizabeth hope it will give Elizabeth dear Brother satisfaction . Soon after Elizabeth dear Brother left Elizabeth on Saturday , Elizabeth was fortunate enough to find out in what part of London they were . The particulars Elizabeth reserve till we meet ; it is enough to know The particulars are discovered . Elizabeth have seen they — ” 
      “ Then it is as Jane always hoped , ” cried Jane ; “ they are married ! ” 
 
  Elizabeth read on : 
 
  “ Elizabeth have seen they . They are not married , nor can Elizabeth find there was any intention of being so ; but if Elizabeth dear Brother are willing to perform the engagements which Elizabeth have ventured to make on Elizabeth dear Brother side , Elizabeth hope it will not be long before they are . All that is required of Elizabeth dear Brother is , to assure to Elizabeth dear Brother daughter , by settlement , Elizabeth niece equal share of the five thousand pounds secured among Elizabeth dear Brother children after the decease of Elizabeth dear Brother and Elizabeth sister ; and , moreover , to enter into an engagement of allowing Elizabeth niece , during Elizabeth dear Brother life , one hundred pounds per annum . These are conditions which , considering everything , Elizabeth had no hesitation in complying with , as far as Elizabeth thought Elizabeth privileged , for Elizabeth dear Brother . Elizabeth shall send this by express , that no time may be lost in bringing Elizabeth Elizabeth dear Brother answer . Elizabeth dear Brother will easily comprehend , from The particulars , that Charlie ’s circumstances are not so hopeless as Charlie ’s circumstances are generally believed to be . The world has been deceived in that respect ; and Elizabeth am happy to say there will be some little money , even when all Charlie ’s debts are discharged , to settle on Elizabeth niece , in addition to Elizabeth niece own fortune . If , as Elizabeth conclude will be the case , Elizabeth dear Brother send Elizabeth full powers to act in Elizabeth dear Brother name throughout the whole of this business , Elizabeth will immediately give directions to Haggerston for preparing a proper settlement . There will not be the smallest occasion for Elizabeth dear Brother coming to town again ; therefore stay quiet at Longbourn , and depend on Elizabeth diligence and care . Send back Elizabeth dear Brother answer as fast as Elizabeth dear Brother can , and be careful to write explicitly . We have judged it best that Elizabeth niece should be married from the house . Elizabeth niece comes to We to - day . Elizabeth shall write again as soon as anything more is determined on . Elizabeth dear Brother , etc . , 
 
  “ EDW . GARDINER . ” 
 
  “ Is it possible ? ” cried Elizabeth , when Elizabeth had finished . “ Can it be possible that good man will marry Elizabeth niece ? ” 
 
  “ George is not so undeserving , then , as we thought good man , ” said Jane . “ Father ’s , Elizabeth congratulate Father ’s . ” 
 
  “ And have Father ’s answered a letter ? ” cried Elizabeth . 
 
  “ No ; but it must be done soon . ” 
 
  Most earnestly did Elizabeth then entreat Father ’s to lose no more time before Father ’s wrote . 
 
  “ Oh ! Elizabeth dear father , ” Elizabeth cried , “ come back and write immediately . Consider how important every moment is in such a case . ” 
 
  “ Let Jane write for Father ’s , ” said Jane , “ if Father ’s dislike the trouble Father ’s . ” 
 
  “ Father ’s dislike the trouble very much , ” Father ’s replied ; “ but it must be done . ” 
 
  And so saying , Father ’s turned back with Jane and Elizabeth , and walked towards the house . 
 
  “ And may Elizabeth ask — ” said Elizabeth ; “ but the terms , Elizabeth suppose , must be complied with . ” 
 
  “ Complied with ! Elizabeth am only ashamed of good man asking so little . ” 
 
  “ And they must marry ! Yet good man is such a man ! ” 
 
  “ Yes , yes , they must marry . There is nothing else to be done . But there are two things that Elizabeth want very much to know ; one is , how much money Jane uncle has laid down to bring it about ; and the other , how am Elizabeth ever to pay Jane uncle . ” 
 
  “ Money ! Elizabeth uncle ! ” cried Jane , “ what do Father ’s mean , Father ’s ? ” 
 
  “ Father ’s mean , that no man in no man in senses would marry Elizabeth niece on so slight a temptation as one hundred a year during Father ’s life , and fifty after Father ’s am gone . ” 
 
  “ That is very true , ” said Elizabeth ; “ though That had not occurred to Elizabeth before . good man debts to be discharged , and something still to remain ! Oh ! it must be Elizabeth uncle ’s doings ! Generous , good man , Elizabeth am afraid good man has distressed good man . A small sum could not do all this . ” 
 
  “ No , ” said Father ’s ; “ good man ’s a fool if good man takes Elizabeth niece with a farthing less than ten thousand pounds . Elizabeth should be sorry to think so ill of good man , in the very beginning of our relationship . ” 
 
  “ Ten thousand pounds ! Heaven forbid ! How is half such a sum to be repaid ? ” 
 
  Father ’s made no answer , and each of Jane and Elizabeth , deep in thought , continued silent till Jane and Elizabeth reached the house . Father ’s then went on to the library to write , and Jane and Elizabeth walked into the breakfast - room . 
 
  “ And they are really to be married ! ” cried Elizabeth , as soon as Jane and Elizabeth were by Jane and Elizabeth . “ How strange are is ! And for are Jane and Elizabeth are to be thankful . That they should marry , small as is they chance of happiness , and wretched as is good man character , Jane and Elizabeth are forced to rejoice . Oh , Elizabeth niece ! ” 
 
  “ Jane comfort Jane with thinking , ” replied Jane , “ that good man certainly would not marry Elizabeth niece if good man had not a real regard for Elizabeth niece . Though Jane uncle has done something towards clearing good man , Jane can not believe that ten thousand pounds , or anything like ten thousand pounds , has been advanced . good man has children of good man own , and may have more . How could good man spare half ten thousand pounds ? ” 
 
  “ If good man were ever able to learn what good man debts have been , ” said Elizabeth , “ and how much is settled on good man side on Jane and Elizabeth sister , we shall exactly know what Edward has done for them , because good man has not sixpence of good man own . The kindness of Elizabeth uncle and aunt can never be requited . Elizabeth uncle and aunt taking Elizabeth niece home , and affording Elizabeth niece Elizabeth uncle and aunt personal protection and countenance , is such a sacrifice to Elizabeth niece advantage as years of gratitude can not enough acknowledge . By this time Elizabeth niece is actually with Elizabeth uncle and aunt ! If such goodness does not make Elizabeth niece miserable now , Elizabeth niece will never deserve to be happy ! What a meeting for Elizabeth niece , when Elizabeth niece first sees Elizabeth aunt ! ” 
 
  “ We must endeavour to forget all that has passed on either side , ” said Jane : “ Jane hope and trust they will yet be happy . good man consenting to marry Elizabeth niece is a proof , Jane will believe , that good man is come to a right way of thinking . they mutual affection will steady they ; and Jane flatter Jane they will settle so quietly , and live in so rational a manner , as may in time make they past imprudence forgotten . ” 
 
  “ they conduct has been such , ” replied Elizabeth , “ as neither Jane , nor Elizabeth , nor anybody can ever forget . It is useless to talk of they conduct . ” 
 
  It now occurred to Jane and Elizabeth that Jane and Elizabeth mother was in all likelihood perfectly ignorant of what had happened . Jane and Elizabeth went to the library , therefore , and asked Jane and Elizabeth father whether Father ’s would not wish Jane and Elizabeth to make happened known to Jane and Elizabeth mother . Father ’s was writing and , without raising Father ’s head , coolly replied : 
 
  “ Just as Elizabeth please . ” 
 
  “ May we take Elizabeth uncle ’s letter to read to Elizabeth niece ? ” 
 
  “ Take whatever Elizabeth like , and get away . ” Elizabeth Elizabeth took a letter from Father ’s writing - table , and they went up stairs together . Mary and Kitty were both with Jane and Elizabeth mother : one communication would , therefore , do for all . After a slight preparation for good news , a letter was read aloud . Jane and Elizabeth mother could hardly contain Jane and Elizabeth mother . As soon as Jane had read Edward ’s hope of Elizabeth niece being soon married , Jane joy burst forth , and every following sentence added to Jane joy exuberance . Jane was now in an irritation as violent from delight , as Jane had ever been fidgety from alarm and vexation . To know that Elizabeth niece would be married was enough . Jane was disturbed by no fear for Jane felicity , nor humbled by any remembrance of Jane misconduct . 
 
  “ Elizabeth niece ! ” Jane cried . “ This is delightful indeed ! Elizabeth niece will be married ! Jane shall see Elizabeth niece again ! Elizabeth niece will be married at sixteen ! Jane good , kind brother ! Jane knew how it would be . Jane knew Edward would manage everything ! How Jane long to see Elizabeth niece ! and to see good man too ! But the clothes , the clothes ! Jane will write to Jane sister Gardiner about the clothes directly . Elizabeth , Elizabeth dear , run down to Father ’s , and ask Father ’s how much Father ’s will give Elizabeth niece . Stay , stay , Elizabeth will go Elizabeth . Ring the bell , Kitty , for Miss Bennet . Elizabeth will put on Elizabeth things in a moment . Jane How merry we shall be together when we meet ! ” 
 
  Elizabeth endeavoured to give some relief to the violence of these transports , by leading Elizabeth thoughts to the obligations which Edward ’s behaviour laid them all under . 
 
  “ For we must attribute this happy conclusion , ” Elizabeth added , “ in a great measure to Edward kindness . We are persuaded that Edward has pledged Edward to assist Charlie ’s with money . ” 
 
  “ Well , ” cried Elizabeth mother , “ it is all very right ; who should do assist but Jane uncle ? If Edward had not had a family of Edward own , Elizabeth and Elizabeth children must have had all Edward money , Elizabeth dear Brother know ; and it is the first time Elizabeth and Elizabeth children have ever had anything from Edward , except a few presents . Well ! Jane and Elizabeth mother am so happy ! In a short time Elizabeth shall have Elizabeth niece married . Jane and Elizabeth mother How well it sounds ! And Elizabeth niece was only sixteen last June . Elizabeth dear Jane , Elizabeth am in such a flutter , that Elizabeth am sure Elizabeth ca n’t write ; so Elizabeth will dictate , and Jane write for Elizabeth . We will settle with Jane father about the money afterwards ; but the things should be ordered immediately . ” 
 
  Elizabeth was then proceeding to all the particulars of calico , muslin , and cambric , and would shortly have dictated some very plentiful orders , had not Jane , though with some difficulty , persuaded Elizabeth to wait till Elizabeth father was at leisure to be consulted . One day ’s delay , Jane observed , would be of small importance ; and Jane mother was too happy to be quite so obstinate as usual . Other schemes , too , came into Elizabeth head . 
 
  “ Elizabeth will go to Meryton , ” said Elizabeth , “ as soon as Elizabeth am dressed , and tell the good , good news to Elizabeth niece . And as Elizabeth come back , Elizabeth can call on Lady Lucas and Mrs. Long . Kitty , run down and order the carriage . An airing would do Elizabeth a great deal of good , Elizabeth am sure . Girls , can Elizabeth do anything for Girls in Meryton ? Oh ! Here comes Miss Bennet ! Miss Bennet , have Miss Bennet heard the good , good news ? Elizabeth niece is going to be married ; and you shall all have a bowl of punch to make merry at Elizabeth niece wedding . ” 
 
  Miss Bennet began instantly to express Miss Bennet joy . Elizabeth received Miss Bennet congratulations amongst the rest , and then , sick of this folly , took refuge in Elizabeth own room , that Elizabeth might think with freedom . 
 
  Elizabeth niece situation must , at best , be bad enough ; but that Elizabeth niece situation was no worse , Elizabeth had need to be thankful . Elizabeth felt it so ; and though , in looking forward , neither rational happiness nor worldly prosperity could be justly expected for Elizabeth sister , in looking back to what they had feared , only two hours ago , Elizabeth felt all the advantages of what they had gained . 
 Chapter 
 
  Father had very often wished before this period of Father life that , instead of spending Father whole income , Father had laid by an annual sum for the better provision of Father children , and of Father wife , if Father wife survived Father . Father now wished it more than ever . Had Father done Father duty in that respect , Father wife need not have been indebted to Father wife uncle for whatever of honour or credit could now be purchased for Father wife . The satisfaction of prevailing on one of the most worthless young men in Great Britain to be Father wife husband might then have rested in The satisfaction of prevailing on one of the most worthless young men in Great Britain to be Father wife husband proper place . 
 
  Father was seriously concerned that a cause of so little advantage to anyone should be forwarded at the sole expense of Father brother - in - law , and Father was determined , if possible , to find out the extent of Father brother - in - law assistance , and to discharge the obligation as soon as Father could . 
 
  When first Father had married , economy was held to be perfectly useless , for , of course , Father brother - in - law and Father wife were to have a son . a son was to join in cutting off the entail , as soon as a son should be of age , and Father wife and younger children would by that means be provided for . Five daughters successively entered the world , but yet a son was to come ; and Father wife , for many years after Father wife birth , had been certain that a son would . This event had at last been despaired of , but it was then too late to be saving . Father wife had no turn for economy , and Father wife husband ’s love of independence had alone prevented Father brother - in - law and Father wife exceeding Father brother - in - law and Father wife income . 
 
  Five thousand pounds was settled by marriage articles on Father wife and Father children . But in what proportions Five thousand pounds should be divided amongst Father children depended on the will of the parents . This was one point , with regard to Father wife , at least , which was now to be settled , and Father could have no hesitation in acceding to the proposal before Father . In terms of grateful acknowledgment for the kindness of Father brother - in - law , though expressed most concisely , Father then delivered on paper Father perfect approbation of all that was done , and Father willingness to fulfil the engagements that had been made for Father . Father had never before supposed that , could Father brother - in - law be prevailed on to marry Father daughter , marry would be done with so little inconvenience to Father as by the present arrangement . Father would scarcely be ten pounds a year the loser by the hundred that was to be paid them ; for , what with Father wife board and pocket allowance , and the continual presents in money which passed to Father wife through Father wife mother ’s hands , Father wife expenses had been very little within that sum . 
 
  That it would be done with such trifling exertion on Father side , too , was another very welcome surprise ; for Father wish at present was to have as little trouble in the business as possible . When the first transports of rage which had produced Father activity in seeking Father wife were over , Father naturally returned to all Father former indolence . Father letter was soon dispatched ; for , though dilatory in undertaking business , Father was quick in Father letter execution . Father begged to know further particulars of what Father was indebted to Father brother - in - law , but was too angry with Father wife to send any message to Father wife . 
 
  The good news spread quickly through the house , and with proportionate speed through the neighbourhood . The good news was borne in the neighbourhood with decent philosophy . To be sure , it would have been more for the advantage of conversation had Father wife come upon the town ; or , as the happiest alternative , been secluded from the world , in some distant farmhouse . But there was much to be talked of in marrying Father wife ; and the good - natured wishes for Father wife well - doing which had proceeded before from all the spiteful old ladies in Meryton lost but a little of all the spiteful old ladies in Meryton spirit in this change of circumstances , because with such an husband Father wife misery was considered certain . 
 
  It was a fortnight since Father wife had been downstairs ; but on this happy day Father wife again took Father wife seat at the head of Father wife table , and in spirits oppressively high . No sentiment of shame gave a damp to Father wife triumph . The marriage of a daughter , which had been the first object of Father wife wishes since Jane was sixteen , was now on the point of accomplishment , and Father wife thoughts and Father wife words ran wholly on those attendants of elegant nuptials , fine muslins , new carriages , and servants . Father wife was busily searching through the neighbourhood for a proper situation for Father wife daughter , and , without knowing or considering what their income might be , rejected many as deficient in size and importance . 
 
  “ Haye Park might do , ” said Father wife , “ if the Gouldings could quit Haye Park — or the great house at Stoke , if the drawing - room were larger ; but Ashworth is too far off ! Father wife could not bear to have Father wife ten miles from Father wife ; and as for Pulvis Lodge , the attics are dreadful . ” 
 
  Father wife husband allowed Father wife to talk on without interruption while the servants remained . But when the servants had withdrawn , Father wife husband ’s said to Father wife : “ Father wife , before Father wife take any or all of these houses for Father wife son and Father wife , let us come to a right understanding . Into one house in this neighbourhood Father wife son and Father wife shall never have admittance . Father wife husband ’s will not encourage the impudence of either , by receiving Father wife son and Father wife at Longbourn . ” 
 
  A long dispute followed this declaration ; but Father was firm . A long dispute soon led to another ; and Father wife found , with amazement and horror , that Father wife husband would not advance a guinea to buy clothes for Father wife . Father protested that Father wife should receive from Father no mark of affection whatever on the occasion . Father wife could hardly comprehend it . That Father anger could be carried to such a point of inconceivable resentment as to refuse Father wife a privilege without which Father wife marriage would scarcely seem valid , exceeded all Father wife could believe possible . Father wife was more alive to the disgrace which Father wife want of new clothes must reflect on Father wife nuptials , than to any sense of shame at Father wife eloping and living with Father brother - in - law a fortnight before Father wife nuptials took place . 
 
  Father wife was now most heartily sorry that Father wife had , from the distress of the moment , been led to make Father brother - in - law acquainted with their fears for Father wife sister ; for since Father wife marriage would so shortly give the proper termination to the elopement , their might hope to conceal the elopement unfavourable beginning from all those who were not immediately on the spot . 
 
  Father wife had no fear of the elopement spreading farther through Father brother - in - law means . There were few people on whose secrecy Father wife would have more confidently depended ; but , at the same time , there was no one whose knowledge of a sister ’s frailty would have mortified Father wife so much — not , however , from any fear of disadvantage from a sister ’s frailty individually to Father wife , for , at any rate , there seemed a gulf impassable between them . Had Father wife marriage been concluded on the most honourable terms , it was not to be supposed that Father brother - in - law would connect Father brother - in - law with a family where , to every other objection , would now be added an alliance and relationship of the nearest kind with Father brother - in - law Father brother - in - law so justly scorned . 
 
  From such a connection Father wife could not wonder that Father brother - in - law would shrink . The wish of procuring Father wife regard , which Father wife had assured Father wife of Father brother - in - law feeling in Derbyshire , could not in rational expectation survive such a blow as this . Father wife was humbled , Father wife was grieved ; Father wife repented , though Father wife hardly knew of what . Father wife became jealous of Father brother - in - law esteem , when Father wife could no longer hope to be benefited by Father brother - in - law esteem . Father wife wanted to hear of Father brother - in - law , when there seemed the least chance of gaining intelligence . Father wife was convinced that Father wife could have been happy with Father brother - in - law , when it was no longer likely they should meet . 
 
  What a triumph for Father brother - in - law , as Father wife often thought , could Father brother - in - law know that the proposals which Father wife had proudly spurned only four months ago , would now have been most gladly and gratefully received ! Father brother - in - law was as generous , Father wife doubted not , as the most generous of Father brother - in - law sex ; but while Father brother - in - law was mortal , there must be a triumph . 
 
  Father wife began now to comprehend that Father brother - in - law was exactly the man who , in disposition and talents , would most suit Father wife . Father brother - in - law understanding and temper , though unlike Father wife own , would have answered all Father wife wishes . It was an union that must have been to the advantage of both ; by Father wife ease and liveliness , Father brother - in - law mind might have been softened , Father brother - in - law manners improved ; and from Father brother - in - law judgement , information , and knowledge of the world , Father wife must have received benefit of greater importance . 
 
  But no such happy marriage could now teach the admiring multitude what connubial felicity really was . An union of a different tendency , and precluding the possibility of the other , was soon to be formed in both family . 
 
  How Father brother - in - law and Father wife were to be supported in tolerable independence , Father wife could not imagine . But how little of permanent happiness could belong to a couple who were only brought together because a couple who were only brought together because passions were stronger than a couple who were only brought together because virtue , Father wife could easily conjecture . 
 
  Edward soon wrote again to Edward brother . To Father ’s acknowledgments Edward briefly replied , with assurance of Edward eagerness to promote the welfare of any of Edward family ; and concluded with entreaties that the subject might never be mentioned to Edward again . The principal purport of Edward letter was to inform Edward brother that Charlie had resolved on quitting the militia . 
 
  “ It was greatly Edward wish that Charlie should do so , ” Edward added , “ as soon as Charlie marriage was fixed on . And Edward think Edward brother will agree with Edward , in considering the removal from the militia as highly advisable , both on Charlie account and Edward niece ’s . It is Charlie ’s intention to go into the regulars ; and among Charlie former friends , there are still some who are able and willing to assist Charlie in the army . Charlie has the promise of an ensigncy in General — — ’s regiment , now quartered in the North . It is an advantage to have General — — ’s regiment , now quartered in the North so far from this part of the kingdom . Charlie promises fairly ; and Edward hope among different people , where they may each have a character to preserve , they will both be more prudent . Edward have written to Colonel Forster , to inform Colonel Forster of our present arrangements , and to request that Colonel Forster will satisfy the various creditors of Charlie in and near Brighton , with assurances of speedy payment , for which Edward have pledged Edward . And will Edward brother give Edward brother the trouble of carrying similar assurances to Charlie creditors in Meryton , of whom Edward shall subjoin a list according to Charlie information ? Charlie has given in all Charlie debts ; Edward hope at least Charlie has not deceived us . Charlie has our directions , and all will be completed in a week . They will then join Charlie regiment , unless they are first invited to Longbourn ; and Edward understand from Madeline , that Father wife is very desirous of seeing Edward brother before Father wife leaves the South . Father wife is well , and begs to be dutifully remembered to Edward brother and Father wife mother.—Yours , etc . , 
 
  “ Edward . ” 
 
  Father and Father daughters saw all the advantages of Father brother - in - law removal from the — — shire as clearly as Edward could do . But Father wife was not so well pleased with Father brother - in - law removal . Father wife being settled in the North , just when Father wife had expected most pleasure and pride in Father wife company , for Father wife had by no means given up Father wife plan of their residing in Hertfordshire , was a severe disappointment ; and , besides , it was such a pity that Father wife should be taken from a regiment where Father wife was acquainted with everybody , and had so many favourites . 
 
  “ Father wife is so fond of Colonel Forster , ” said Father wife , “ it will be quite shocking to send Father wife away ! And there are several of the young men , too , that Father wife likes very much . The officers may not be so pleasant in General — — ’s regiment , now quartered in the North . ” 
 
  Father wife request , for such it might be considered , of being admitted into both family again before Father wife set off for the North , received at first an absolute negative . But Jane and Elizabeth , who agreed in wishing , for the sake of Father wife feelings and consequence , that Father wife should be noticed on Father wife marriage by Father wife parents , urged Father brother - in - law so earnestly yet so rationally and so mildly , to receive Father wife and Father brother - in - law at Longbourn , as soon as Father wife and Father brother - in - law were married , that Father brother - in - law was prevailed on to think as Father wife and Father brother - in - law thought , and act as Father wife and Father brother - in - law wished . And Father wife and Father brother - in - law mother had the satisfaction of knowing that Father wife would be able to show Father wife in the neighbourhood before Father wife was banished to the North . When Father wrote again to Father brother , therefore , Father sent Father permission for Father wife and Father brother - in - law to come ; and it was settled , that as soon as the ceremony was over , Father wife and Father brother - in - law should proceed to Longbourn . Father wife was surprised , however , that Father brother - in - law should consent to such a scheme , and had Father wife consulted only Father wife own inclination , any meeting with Father brother - in - law would have been the last object of Father wife wishes . 
 Chapter 
 
  Their sister ’s wedding day arrived ; and Jane and Elizabeth felt for Their sister ’s probably more than Their sister ’s felt for Their sister ’s . The carriage was sent to meet the young couple at — — , and the young couple were to return in The carriage by dinner - time . the young couple arrival was dreaded by the elder Miss Bennets , and Jane more especially , who gave Their sister ’s the feelings which would have attended Jane , had Jane been the culprit , and was wretched in the thought of what Jane sister must endure . 
 
  the young couple came . The family were assembled in the breakfast room to receive the young couple . Smiles decked the face of Mother as the carriage drove up to the door ; Mother husband looked impenetrably grave ; Mother daughters , alarmed , anxious , uneasy . 
 
  Their sister ’s voice was heard in the vestibule ; the door was thrown open , and Their sister ’s ran into the room . Their sister ’s mother stepped forwards , embraced Their sister ’s , and welcomed Their sister ’s with rapture ; gave Mother hand , with an affectionate smile , to George , who followed George , who followed lady ; and wished the young couple joy with an alacrity which shewed no doubt of the young couple happiness . 
 
  the young couple reception from Father , to whom the young couple then turned , was not quite so cordial . Father , to whom the young couple then turned countenance rather gained in austerity ; and Father , to whom the young couple then turned scarcely opened Father , to whom the young couple then turned lips . The easy assurance of the young couple , indeed , was enough to provoke Father , to whom the young couple then turned . Elizabeth was disgusted , and the elder Miss Bennets was shocked . Their sister ’s was Lydia still ; untamed , unabashed , wild , noisy , and fearless . Their sister ’s turned from sister to sister , demanding their congratulations ; and when at length their sat down , looked eagerly round the room , took notice of some little alteration in the room , and observed , with a laugh , that it was a great while since Their sister ’s had been there . 
 
  George , who followed was not at all more distressed than Their sister ’s , but George , who followed manners were always so pleasing , that had George , who followed character and George , who followed marriage been exactly what George , who followed character and George , who followed marriage ought , George , who followed smiles and George , who followed easy address , while George , who followed claimed their relationship , would have delighted their . Elizabeth had not before believed George , who followed quite equal to such assurance ; but Elizabeth sat down , resolving within Elizabeth to draw no limits in future to the impudence of an impudent man . Elizabeth blushed , and Jane blushed ; but the cheeks of Jane and Elizabeth Jane and Elizabeth confusion suffered no variation of colour . 
 
  There was no want of discourse . Their sister ’s and Their sister ’s mother could neither of Their sister ’s and Their sister ’s mother talk fast enough ; and George , who followed , began enquiring after George , who followed acquaintance in that neighbourhood , with a good humoured ease which Elizabeth felt very unable to equal in Elizabeth replies . Their sister ’s and Their sister ’s mother seemed each of Their sister ’s and Their sister ’s mother to have the happiest memories in the world . Nothing of the past was recollected with pain ; and Their sister ’s led voluntarily to subjects which Their sister ’s sisters would not have alluded to for the world . 
 
  “ Only think of its being three months , ” Their sister ’s cried , “ since Their sister ’s went away ; it seems but a fortnight Their sister ’s declare ; and yet there have been things enough happened in the time . Good gracious ! when Their sister ’s went away , Their sister ’s am sure Their sister ’s had no more idea of being married till Their sister ’s came back again ! though Their sister ’s thought it would be very good fun if Their sister ’s was . ” 
 
  Father , to whom the young couple then turned lifted up Father , to whom the young couple then turned eyes . Jane was distressed . Elizabeth looked expressively at Their sister ’s ; but Elizabeth Elizabeth chose to be insensible , gaily continued , “ Oh ! Mother , do the people hereabouts know Elizabeth am married to - day ? Elizabeth was afraid the people hereabouts might not ; and we overtook William Goulding in William Goulding curricle , so Elizabeth was determined William Goulding should know am , and so Elizabeth let down the side - glass next to William Goulding , and took off Elizabeth glove , and let Elizabeth hand just rest upon the window frame , so that William Goulding might see the ring , and then Elizabeth bowed and smiled like anything . ” Elizabeth Elizabeth could bear it no longer . Elizabeth got up , and ran out of the room ; and returned no more , till Elizabeth heard the young couple passing through the hall to the dining parlour . Elizabeth then joined the young couple soon enough to see Their sister ’s , with anxious parade , walk up to Their sister ’s mother ’s right hand , and hear Their sister ’s say to Jane , “ Ah ! Jane , Their sister ’s take Jane place now , and Jane must go lower , because Their sister ’s am a married woman . ” 
 
  It was not to be supposed that time would give Their sister ’s that embarrassment from which Their sister ’s had been so wholly free at first . Their sister ’s ease and good spirits increased . Their sister ’s longed to see Mrs. Phillips , the Lucases , and all their other neighbours , and to hear Their sister ’s called “ Mrs. Wickham ” by each of Mrs. Phillips , the Lucases , and all their other neighbours ; and in the mean time , Their sister ’s went after dinner to show Their sister ’s ring , and boast of being married , to Mrs. Phillips and the two housemaids . 
 
  “ Well , Mother , ” said Their sister ’s , when they were all returned to the breakfast room , “ and what do Mother think of Mother husband ? Is not Mother husband a charming man ? Their sister ’s am sure Their sister ’s sisters must all envy Their sister ’s . Their sister ’s only hope Their sister ’s sisters may have half Their sister ’s good luck . Their sister ’s sisters must all go to Brighton . Brighton is the place to get husbands . What a pity it is , Mother , we did not all go . ” 
 
  “ Very true ; and if Mother had Mother will , we should . But Mother dear Lydia , Mother do n’t at all like Their sister ’s going such a way off . Must going be so ? ” 
 
  “ Oh , lord ! yes;—there is nothing in that . Their sister ’s shall like it of all things . Mother and George , who followed , and Their sister ’s sisters , must come down and see us . us shall be at Newcastle all the winter , and Their sister ’s dare say there will be some balls , and Their sister ’s will take care to get good partners for them all . ” 
 
  “ Mother should like it beyond anything ! ” said Their sister ’s mother . 
 
  “ And then when Their sister ’s go away , Their sister ’s may leave one or two of Mother sisters behind Their sister ’s ; and Mother dare say Mother shall get husbands for one or two of Mother sisters before the winter is over . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth thank Mother for Elizabeth share of the favour , ” said Elizabeth ; “ but Elizabeth do not particularly like Mother way of getting husbands . ” 
 
  the young couple visitors were not to remain above ten days with the young couple . Charlie had received Charlie commission before Charlie left London , and Charlie was to join Charlie regiment at the end of a fortnight . 
 
  No one but Mother regretted that the young couple visitors stay would be so short ; and Mother made the most of the time by visiting about with Their sister ’s , and having very frequent parties at home . very frequent parties at home were acceptable to all ; to avoid a family circle was even more desirable to such as did think , than such as did not . 
 
  George , who followed affection for Their sister ’s was just what Elizabeth had expected to find George , who followed affection for Their sister ’s ; not equal to Their sister ’s for George , who followed . Elizabeth had scarcely needed Elizabeth present observation to be satisfied , from the reason of things , that their elopement had been brought on by the strength of Their sister ’s love , rather than by George , who followed ; and Elizabeth would have wondered why , without violently caring for Their sister ’s , George , who followed chose to elope with Their sister ’s at all , had Their sister ’s not felt certain that George , who followed flight was rendered necessary by distress of circumstances ; and if was were the case , George , who followed was not the young man to resist an opportunity of having a companion . 
 
  Their sister ’s was exceedingly fond of George , who followed . George , who followed was Their sister ’s dear George on every occasion ; no one was to be put in competition with George , who followed . George , who followed did every thing best in the world ; and Their sister ’s was sure George , who followed would kill more birds on the first of September , than any body else in the country . 
 
  One morning , soon after the young couple visitors arrival , as Their sister ’s was sitting with Their sister ’s two elder sisters , Their sister ’s said to Elizabeth : 
 
  “ Elizabeth , Their sister ’s never gave Elizabeth an account of Their sister ’s wedding , Their sister ’s believe . Elizabeth were not by , when Their sister ’s told Mother and the others all about Their sister ’s wedding . Are not Elizabeth curious to hear how Their sister ’s wedding was managed ? ” 
 
  “ No really , ” replied Elizabeth ; “ Elizabeth think there can not be too little said on the subject . ” 
 
  “ La ! Their sister ’s are so strange ! But Their sister ’s must tell the young couple how Their sister ’s wedding went off . We were married , you know , at St. Clement ’s , because George , who followed lodgings were in St. Clement ’s . And it was settled that we should all be there by eleven o’clock . Their sister ’s uncle and aunt and Their sister ’s were to go together ; and the others were to meet We at the church . Well , Monday morning came , and Their sister ’s was in such a fuss ! Their sister ’s was so afraid , you know , that something would happen to put Their sister ’s wedding off , and then Their sister ’s should have gone quite distracted . And there was Their sister ’s aunt , all the time Their sister ’s was dressing , preaching and talking away just as if Their sister ’s aunt was reading a sermon . However , Their sister ’s did not hear above one word in ten , for Their sister ’s was thinking , Mother may suppose , of Their sister ’s dear George . Their sister ’s longed to know whether George , who followed would be married in George , who followed blue coat . ” 
 
  “ Well , and so we breakfasted at ten as usual ; Their sister ’s thought it would never be over ; for , by the bye , the young couple are to understand , that Their sister ’s uncle and aunt were horrid unpleasant all the time Their sister ’s was with Their sister ’s uncle and aunt . If the young couple ’ll believe Their sister ’s , Their sister ’s did not once put Their sister ’s foot out of doors , though Their sister ’s was there a fortnight . Not one party , or scheme , or anything . To be sure London was rather thin , but , however , the Little Theatre was open . Well , and so just as the carriage came to the door , Their sister ’s uncle was called away upon business to that horrid man Mr. Stone . And then , you know , when once they get together , there is no end of it . Well , Their sister ’s was so frightened Their sister ’s did not know what to do , for Their sister ’s uncle was to give Their sister ’s away ; and if we were beyond the hour , we could not be married all day . But , luckily , Their sister ’s uncle came back again in ten minutes ’ time , and then we all set out . However , Their sister ’s recollected afterwards that if Their sister ’s uncle had been prevented going , Their sister ’s wedding need not be put off , for Fitzwilliam might have done as well . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam ! ” repeated Elizabeth , in utter amazement . 
 
  “ Oh , yes!—he was to come there with George , who followed , you know . But gracious Their sister ’s ! Their sister ’s quite forgot ! Their sister ’s ought not to have said a word about it . Their sister ’s promised them so faithfully ! What will George , who followed say ? It was to be such a secret ! ” 
 
  “ If it was to be secret , ” said Jane , “ say not another word on the subject . Their sister ’s may depend upon Jane seeking no further . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! certainly , ” said Elizabeth , though burning with curiosity ; “ we will ask Their sister ’s no questions . ” 
 
  “ Thank Elizabeth , ” said Their sister ’s , “ for if Elizabeth did , Their sister ’s should certainly tell the young couple , and then George , who followed would be angry . ” 
 
  On such encouragement to ask , Elizabeth was forced to put it out of Elizabeth power , by running away . 
 
  But to live in ignorance on such a point was impossible ; or at least it was impossible not to try for information . Fitzwilliam had been at Elizabeth sister ’s wedding . It was exactly a scene , and exactly among people , where Fitzwilliam had apparently least to do , and least temptation to go . Conjectures as to the meaning of it , rapid and wild , hurried into Elizabeth brain ; but Elizabeth was satisfied with none . Those that best pleased Elizabeth , as placing Fitzwilliam conduct in the noblest light , seemed most improbable . Elizabeth could not bear such suspense ; and hastily seizing a sheet of paper , wrote a short letter to Their sister ’s aunt , to request an explanation of what Their sister ’s had dropt , if an explanation of what Their sister ’s had dropt were compatible with the secrecy which had been intended . 
 
  “ the young couple may readily comprehend , ” Elizabeth added , “ what Elizabeth curiosity must be to know how a person unconnected with any of us , and ( comparatively speaking ) a stranger to our family , should have been amongst the young couple at such a time . Pray write instantly , and let Their sister ’s understand it — unless it is , for very cogent reasons , to remain in the secrecy which Their sister ’s seems to think necessary ; and then Their sister ’s must endeavour to be satisfied with ignorance . ” 
 
  “ Not that Their sister ’s shall , though , ” Their sister ’s added to Their sister ’s , as Their sister ’s finished a short letter ; “ and Their sister ’s aunt , if Their sister ’s aunt do not tell Their sister ’s in an honourable manner , Their sister ’s shall certainly be reduced to tricks and stratagems to find it out . ” 
 
  Jane ’s delicate sense of honour would not allow Jane to speak to Elizabeth privately of what Their sister ’s had let fall ; Elizabeth was glad of it;—till it appeared whether Elizabeth enquiries would receive any satisfaction , Elizabeth had rather be without a confidante . 
 Chapter 
 
  Elizabeth had the satisfaction of receiving an answer to Elizabeth letter as soon as Elizabeth possibly could . Elizabeth was no sooner in possession of an answer to Elizabeth letter than , hurrying into the little copse , where Elizabeth was least likely to be interrupted , Elizabeth sat down on one of the benches and prepared to be happy ; for the length of Elizabeth letter convinced Elizabeth that Elizabeth letter did not contain a denial . 
 
  “ Gracechurch Street , Sept. 6 . 
 
  “ Elizabeth , 
 
  “ M. GARDINER have just received Elizabeth letter , and shall devote this whole morning to answering Elizabeth letter , as M. GARDINER foresee that a little writing will not comprise what M. GARDINER have to tell Elizabeth . M. GARDINER must confess M. GARDINER surprised by Elizabeth application ; M. GARDINER did not expect Elizabeth application from Elizabeth . Do n’t think M. GARDINER angry , however , for M. GARDINER only mean to let Elizabeth know that M. GARDINER had not imagined such enquiries to be necessary on Elizabeth side . If Elizabeth do not choose to understand M. GARDINER , forgive M. GARDINER impertinence . Elizabeth uncle is as much surprised as M. GARDINER am — and nothing but the belief of Elizabeth being a party concerned would have allowed Elizabeth uncle to act as Elizabeth uncle has done . But if Elizabeth are really innocent and ignorant , M. GARDINER must be more explicit . 
 
  “ On the very day of M. GARDINER coming home from Longbourn , Elizabeth uncle had a most unexpected visitor . Fitzwilliam called , and was shut up with Elizabeth uncle several hours . It was all over before M. GARDINER arrived ; so M. GARDINER curiosity was not so dreadfully racked as Elizabeth seems to have been . a most unexpected visitor came to tell Edward that a most unexpected visitor had found out where Elizabeth sister and Charlie were , and that a most unexpected visitor had seen and talked with Elizabeth sister and Charlie ; George repeatedly , Lydia once . From what M. GARDINER can collect , a most unexpected visitor left Derbyshire only one day after ourselves , and came to town with the resolution of hunting for Elizabeth sister and Charlie . The motive professed was a most unexpected visitor conviction of its being owing to a most unexpected visitor that George ’s worthlessness had not been so well known as to make it impossible for any young woman of character to love or confide in a most unexpected visitor . a most unexpected visitor generously imputed the whole to a most unexpected visitor mistaken pride , and confessed that a most unexpected visitor had before thought it beneath a most unexpected visitor to lay a most unexpected visitor private actions open to the world . a most unexpected visitor character was to speak for a most unexpected visitor character . a most unexpected visitor called it , therefore , a most unexpected visitor duty to step forward , and endeavour to remedy an evil which had been brought on by a most unexpected visitor . If a most unexpected visitor had another motive , M. GARDINER am sure another motive would never disgrace a most unexpected visitor . a most unexpected visitor had been some days in town , before a most unexpected visitor was able to discover Elizabeth sister and Charlie ; but a most unexpected visitor had something to direct a most unexpected visitor search , which was more than ourselves had ; and the consciousness of something to direct a most unexpected visitor search , which was more than ourselves had was another reason for a most unexpected visitor resolving to follow ourselves . 
 
  “ There is a lady , it seems , a Mrs. Younge , who was some time ago governess to Georgiana , and was dismissed from her charge on some cause of disapprobation , though a most unexpected visitor did not say what . This Mrs. Younge then took a large house in Edward - street , and has since maintained This Mrs. Younge by letting lodgings . This Mrs. Younge was , a most unexpected visitor knew , intimately acquainted with George ; and a most unexpected visitor went to This Mrs. Younge for intelligence of George as soon as a most unexpected visitor got to town . But it was two or three days before a most unexpected visitor could get from This Mrs. Younge what a most unexpected visitor wanted . This Mrs. Younge would not betray This Mrs. Younge trust , M. GARDINER suppose , without bribery and corruption , for This Mrs. Younge really did know where George was to be found . George indeed had gone to This Mrs. Younge on their first arrival in London , and had This Mrs. Younge been able to receive their into This Mrs. Younge house , their would have taken up their abode with This Mrs. Younge . At length , however , ourselves kind friend procured the wished - for direction . They were in — — street . a most unexpected visitor saw George , and afterwards insisted on seeing Lydia . a most unexpected visitor first object with Lydia , a most unexpected visitor acknowledged , had been to persuade Lydia to quit Lydia present disgraceful situation , and return to Lydia friends as soon as Lydia friends could be prevailed on to receive Lydia , offering a most unexpected visitor assistance , as far as it would go . But a most unexpected visitor found Lydia absolutely resolved on remaining where Lydia was . Lydia cared for none of Lydia friends ; Lydia wanted no help of a most unexpected visitor ; Lydia would not hear of leaving George . Lydia was sure they should be married some time or other , and it did not much signify when . Since such were Lydia feelings , it only remained , a most unexpected visitor thought , to secure and expedite a marriage , which , in a most unexpected visitor very first conversation with George , a most unexpected visitor easily learnt had never been a most unexpected visitor design . a most unexpected visitor confessed a most unexpected visitor obliged to leave the regiment , on account of some debts of honour , which were very pressing ; and scrupled not to lay all the ill - consequences of Lydia ’s flight on Lydia own folly alone . a most unexpected visitor meant to resign a most unexpected visitor commission immediately ; and as to a most unexpected visitor future situation , a most unexpected visitor could conjecture very little about a most unexpected visitor future situation . George must go somewhere , but George did not know where , and George knew George should have nothing to live on . 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam asked George why George had not married Elizabeth sister at once . Though George was not imagined to be very rich , Fitzwilliam would have been able to do something for George , and George situation must have been benefited by marriage . But Fitzwilliam found , in reply to this question , that George still cherished the hope of more effectually making George fortune by marriage in some other country . Under such circumstances , however , George was not likely to be proof against the temptation of immediate relief . 
 
  “ They met several times , for there was much to be discussed . George of course wanted more than George could get ; but at length was reduced to be reasonable . 
 
  “ Everything being settled between they , Fitzwilliam ’s next step was to make Elizabeth uncle acquainted with it , and Fitzwilliam first called in Gracechurch street the evening before Elizabeth came home . But Edward could not be seen , and Fitzwilliam found , on further enquiry , that Elizabeth father was still with Fitzwilliam , but would quit town the next morning . Fitzwilliam did not judge Elizabeth father to be a person whom Fitzwilliam could so properly consult as Elizabeth uncle , and therefore readily postponed seeing George till after the departure of George . Fitzwilliam did not leave Fitzwilliam name , and till the next day it was only known that Fitzwilliam had called on business . 
 
  “ On Saturday Fitzwilliam came again . Elizabeth father was gone , Elizabeth uncle at home , and , as M. GARDINER said before , they had a great deal of talk together . 
 
  “ They met again on Sunday , and then M. GARDINER saw Fitzwilliam too . It was not all settled before Monday : as soon as it was , the express was sent off to Longbourn . But Fitzwilliam was very obstinate . M. GARDINER fancy , Elizabeth , that obstinacy is the real defect of Fitzwilliam character , after all . Fitzwilliam has been accused of many faults at different times , but this is the true one . Nothing was to be done that Fitzwilliam did not do Fitzwilliam ; though M. GARDINER am sure ( and M. GARDINER do not speak it to be thanked , therefore say nothing about it ) , Elizabeth uncle would most readily have settled the whole . 
 
  “ They battled it together for a long time , which was more than either the gentleman or lady concerned in it deserved . But at last Elizabeth uncle was forced to yield , and instead of being allowed to be of use to Elizabeth uncle niece , was forced to put up with only having the probable credit of it , which went sorely against the grain ; and M. GARDINER really believe Elizabeth letter this morning gave Elizabeth uncle great pleasure , because Elizabeth letter this morning required an explanation that would rob Elizabeth uncle of Elizabeth uncle borrowed feathers , and give the praise where the praise was due . But , Elizabeth , this must go no farther than Elizabeth , or Jane at most . 
 
  “ Elizabeth know pretty well , M. GARDINER suppose , what has been done for the young people . a most unexpected visitor debts are to be paid , amounting , M. GARDINER believe , to considerably more than a thousand pounds , another thousand in addition to Lydia own settled upon Lydia , and a most unexpected visitor commission purchased . The reason why all this was to be done by him alone , was such as M. GARDINER have given above . It was owing to him alone , to him alone reserve and want of proper consideration , that George ’s character had been so misunderstood , and consequently that George had been received and noticed as George was . Perhaps there was some truth in this ; though M. GARDINER doubt whether him alone reserve , or anybody ’s reserve , can be answerable for the event . But in spite of all this fine talking , M. GARDINER dear Elizabeth , Elizabeth may rest perfectly assured that Elizabeth uncle would never have yielded , if we had not given him alone credit for another interest in the affair . 
 
  “ When all this was resolved on , George returned again to George friends , who were still staying at Pemberley ; but it was agreed that George should be in London once more when the wedding took place , and all money matters were then to receive the last finish . 
 
  “ M. GARDINER believe M. GARDINER have now told Elizabeth every thing . It is a relation which Elizabeth tell M. GARDINER is to give Elizabeth great surprise ; M. GARDINER hope at least a relation which Elizabeth tell M. GARDINER is to give Elizabeth great surprise will not afford Elizabeth any displeasure . Lydia came to us ; and George had constant admission to the house . George was exactly what George had been , when M. GARDINER knew George in Hertfordshire ; but M. GARDINER would not tell Elizabeth how little M. GARDINER was satisfied with Lydia behaviour while Lydia staid with us , if M. GARDINER had not perceived , by Jane ’s letter last Wednesday , that Lydia conduct on coming home was exactly of a piece with it , and therefore what M. GARDINER now tell Elizabeth can give Elizabeth no fresh pain . M. GARDINER talked to Lydia repeatedly in the most serious manner , representing to Lydia all the wickedness of what Lydia had done , and all the unhappiness Lydia had brought on Lydia family . If Lydia heard M. GARDINER , it was by good luck , for M. GARDINER am sure Lydia did not listen . M. GARDINER was sometimes quite provoked , but then M. GARDINER recollected Elizabeth sister and Charlie , and for Elizabeth sister and Charlie sakes had patience with Lydia . 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam was punctual in Fitzwilliam return , and as Lydia informed Elizabeth , attended the wedding . Fitzwilliam dined with us the next day , and was to leave town again on Wednesday or Thursday . Will Elizabeth be very angry with M. GARDINER , M. GARDINER dear Elizabeth , if M. GARDINER take this opportunity of saying ( what M. GARDINER was never bold enough to say before ) how much M. GARDINER like Fitzwilliam . Fitzwilliam behaviour to us has , in every respect , been as pleasing as when us were in Derbyshire . Fitzwilliam understanding and opinions all please M. GARDINER ; Fitzwilliam wants nothing but a little more liveliness , and that , if Fitzwilliam marry prudently , Fitzwilliam wife may teach Fitzwilliam . M. GARDINER thought Fitzwilliam very sly;—he hardly ever mentioned Elizabeth name . But slyness seems the fashion . 
 
  “ Pray forgive M. GARDINER if M. GARDINER have been very presuming , or at least do not punish M. GARDINER so far as to exclude M. GARDINER from P. M. GARDINER shall never be quite happy till M. GARDINER have been all round the park . A low phaeton , with a nice little pair of ponies , would be the very thing . 
 
  “ But M. GARDINER must write no more . The children have been wanting M. GARDINER this half hour . 
 
  “ Elizabeth , very sincerely , 
  “ M. GARDINER . ” 
 
  The contents of this letter threw Elizabeth into a flutter of spirits , in which it was difficult to determine whether pleasure or pain bore the greatest share . The vague and unsettled suspicions which uncertainty had produced of what Fitzwilliam might have been doing to forward Elizabeth sister match , which Elizabeth had feared to encourage as an exertion of goodness too great to be probable , and at the same time dreaded to be just , from the pain of obligation , were proved beyond their greatest extent to be true ! Fitzwilliam had followed them purposely to town , Fitzwilliam had taken on Fitzwilliam all the trouble and mortification attendant on such a research ; in which supplication had been necessary to a woman whom Fitzwilliam must abominate and despise , and where Fitzwilliam was reduced to meet , frequently meet , reason with , persuade , and finally bribe , Fitzwilliam Fitzwilliam always most wished to avoid , and whose very name it was punishment to Fitzwilliam to pronounce . Fitzwilliam had done all this for Elizabeth sister . Elizabeth heart did whisper that Fitzwilliam had done all this for Elizabeth . But whisper was a hope shortly checked by other considerations , and Elizabeth soon felt that even Elizabeth vanity was insufficient , when required to depend on Fitzwilliam affection for Elizabeth — for a woman who had already refused Fitzwilliam — as able to overcome a sentiment so natural as abhorrence against relationship with George . George George ! Every kind of pride must revolt from the connection . George had , to be sure , done much . Elizabeth was ashamed to think how much . But George had given a reason for George interference , which asked no extraordinary stretch of belief . It was reasonable that George should feel George had been wrong ; George had liberality , and George had the means of exercising liberality ; and though Elizabeth would not place Elizabeth as George principal inducement , Elizabeth could , perhaps , believe that remaining partiality for Elizabeth might assist George endeavours in a cause where Elizabeth peace of mind must be materially concerned . It was painful , exceedingly painful , to know that they were under obligations to George . They owed the restoration of Lydia , Lydia character , every thing , to George . Oh ! how heartily did Elizabeth grieve over every ungracious sensation Elizabeth had ever encouraged , every saucy speech Elizabeth had ever directed towards George . For Elizabeth Elizabeth was humbled ; but Elizabeth was proud of George . Proud that in a cause of compassion and honour , George had been able to get the better of George . Elizabeth read over Elizabeth sister commendation of George again and again . Elizabeth sister commendation of George was hardly enough ; but Elizabeth sister commendation of George pleased Elizabeth . Elizabeth was even sensible of some pleasure , though mixed with regret , on finding how steadfastly both Elizabeth and Elizabeth uncle had been persuaded that affection and confidence subsisted between Fitzwilliam and Elizabeth . 
 
  Elizabeth was roused from Elizabeth seat , and Elizabeth reflections , by some one ’s approach ; and before Elizabeth could strike into another path , Elizabeth was overtaken by George . 
 
  “ George am afraid George interrupt Elizabeth solitary ramble , George dear sister ? ” said George , as George joined Elizabeth . 
 
  “ George certainly do , ” Elizabeth replied with a smile ; “ but it does not follow that the interruption must be unwelcome . ” 
 
  “ George should be sorry indeed , if interrupt were . they were always good friends ; and now they are better . ” 
 
  “ True . Are the others coming out ? ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth do not know . Mother and Lydia are going in the carriage to Meryton . And so , Elizabeth , George find , from they uncle and aunt , that Elizabeth have actually seen Pemberley . ” 
 
  Elizabeth replied in the affirmative . 
 
  “ Elizabeth almost envy George the pleasure , and yet Elizabeth believe it would be too much for Elizabeth , or else Elizabeth could take it in Elizabeth way to Newcastle . And Elizabeth saw This Mrs. Younge , Elizabeth suppose ? Poor Reynolds , This Mrs. Younge was always very fond of Elizabeth . But of course This Mrs. Younge did not mention M. GARDINER name to George . ” 
 
  “ Yes , This Mrs. Younge did . ” 
 
  “ And what did This Mrs. Younge say ? ” 
 
  “ That George were gone into the regiment , and This Mrs. Younge was afraid had — not turned out well . At such a distance as that , you know , things are strangely misrepresented . ” 
 
  “ Certainly , ” George replied , biting George lips . Elizabeth hoped Elizabeth had silenced George ; but George soon afterwards said : 
 
  “ George was surprised to see Fitzwilliam in town last month . We passed each other several times . George wonder what Fitzwilliam can be doing there . ” 
 
  “ Perhaps preparing for Fitzwilliam marriage with Cathleen , ” said Elizabeth . “ It must be something particular , to take Fitzwilliam there at this time of year . ” 
 
  “ Undoubtedly . Did Elizabeth see Fitzwilliam while Elizabeth were at Lambton ? George thought George understood from the Gardiners that Elizabeth had . ” 
 
  “ Yes ; Fitzwilliam introduced us to Fitzwilliam sister . ” 
 
  “ And do Elizabeth like Cathleen ? ” 
 
  “ Very much . ” 
 
  “ George have heard , indeed , that Cathleen is uncommonly improved within this year or two . When George last saw Cathleen , Cathleen was not very promising . George am very glad Elizabeth liked Cathleen . George hope Cathleen will turn out well . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth dare say Cathleen will ; Cathleen has got over the most trying age . ” 
 
  “ Did Elizabeth go by the village of Kympton ? ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth do not recollect that Elizabeth did . ” 
 
  “ M. GARDINER mention the village of Kympton , because the village of Kympton is the living which M. GARDINER ought to have had . the village of Kympton the village of Kympton would have suited M. GARDINER in every respect . ” 
 
  “ How should M. GARDINER have liked making sermons ? ” 
 
  “ Exceedingly well . M. GARDINER should have considered making as part of M. GARDINER duty , and the exertion would soon have been nothing . One ought not to repine;—but , to be sure , it would have been such a thing for M. GARDINER ! The quiet , the retirement of such a life would have answered all M. GARDINER ideas of happiness ! But such a life was not to be . Did Elizabeth ever hear Fitzwilliam mention the circumstance , when Elizabeth were in Kent ? ” 
 
  “ M. GARDINER have heard from authority , which M. GARDINER thought as good , that it was left Elizabeth conditionally only , and at the will of the present patron . ” 
 
  “ M. GARDINER have . Yes , there was something in that ; M. GARDINER told Elizabeth so from the first , George may remember . ” 
 
  “ George did hear , too , that there was a time , when sermon - making was not so palatable to M. GARDINER as sermon - making seems to be at present ; that M. GARDINER actually declared M. GARDINER resolution of never taking orders , and that the business had been compromised accordingly . ” 
 
  “ M. GARDINER did ! and declared was not wholly without foundation . George may remember what M. GARDINER told George on that point , when first we talked of that point . ” 
 
  They were now almost at the door of the house , for Elizabeth had walked fast to get rid of a most unexpected visitor ; and unwilling , for Elizabeth sake , to provoke a most unexpected visitor , Elizabeth only said in reply , with a good - humoured smile : 
 
  “ Come , Charlie , They are brother and sister , George know . Do not let They quarrel about the past . In future , Elizabeth hope They shall be always of one mind . ” 
 
  Elizabeth held out Elizabeth hand ; a most unexpected visitor kissed Elizabeth hand with affectionate gallantry , though a most unexpected visitor hardly knew how to look , and they entered the house . 
 Chapter 
 
  Charlie was so perfectly satisfied with this conversation that Charlie never again distressed Charlie , or provoked Charlie dear sister Elizabeth , by introducing the subject of this conversation ; and Charlie dear sister Elizabeth was pleased to find that Charlie dear sister Elizabeth had said enough to keep Charlie quiet . 
 
  The day of Charlie and Lydia ’s departure soon came , and Charlie dear sister Elizabeth was forced to submit to a separation , which , as Charlie by no means entered into Charlie dear sister Elizabeth scheme of their all going to Newcastle , was likely to continue at least a twelvemonth . 
 
  “ Oh ! Lydia ’s , ” Charlie dear sister Elizabeth cried , “ when shall Charlie and Lydia ’s meet again ? Lydia ’s 
 
  “ Oh , lord ! Lydia ’s do n’t know . Not these two or three years , perhaps . ” 
 
  “ Write to Charlie dear sister Elizabeth very often , Lydia ’s . ” 
 
  “ As often as Lydia ’s can . But you know married women have never much time for writing . Lydia ’s sisters may write to Lydia ’s . Lydia ’s sisters will have nothing else to do . ” 
 
  Charlie ’s adieus were much more affectionate than Charlie wife ’s . Charlie smiled , looked handsome , and said many pretty things . 
 
  “ Charlie is as fine a fellow , ” said Father , as soon as Charlie and Lydia ’s were out of the house , “ as ever Father saw . Charlie simpers , and smirks , and makes love to us all . Father am prodigiously proud of Charlie . Father defy even Sir William Lucas even Sir William Lucas to produce a more valuable son - in - law . ” 
 
  The loss of Charlie dear sister Elizabeth daughter made Charlie dear sister Elizabeth very dull for several days . 
 
  “ Charlie dear sister Elizabeth often think , ” said Charlie dear sister Elizabeth , “ that there is nothing so bad as parting with one ’s friends . One seems so forlorn without one ’s friends . ” 
 
  “ This is the consequence , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth see , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth , of marrying a daughter , ” said Charlie dear sister Elizabeth . “ marrying must make Charlie dear sister Elizabeth better satisfied that Charlie dear sister Elizabeth other four are single . ” 
 
  “ It is no such thing . Lydia ’s does not leave Charlie dear sister Elizabeth because Lydia ’s is married , but only because Charlie regiment happens to be so far off . If Charlie regiment had been nearer , Lydia ’s would not have gone so soon . ” 
 
  But the spiritless condition which this event threw Charlie dear sister Elizabeth into was shortly relieved , and Charlie dear sister Elizabeth mind opened again to the agitation of hope , by an article of news which then began to be in circulation . The housekeeper at Netherfield had received orders to prepare for the arrival of The housekeeper at Netherfield master , who was coming down in a day or two , to shoot there for several weeks . Mother was quite in the fidgets . Charlie dear sister Elizabeth looked at Jane , and smiled and shook Charlie dear sister Elizabeth head by turns . 
 
  “ Well , well , and so Charlie is coming down , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth , ” ( for Mrs. Phillips first brought Charlie dear sister Elizabeth the news ) . “ Well , so much the better . Not that Charlie dear sister Elizabeth care about it , though . Charlie is nothing to us , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth know , and Charlie dear sister Elizabeth am sure Charlie dear sister Elizabeth never want to see Charlie again . But , however , Charlie is very welcome to come to Netherfield , if Charlie likes come . And who knows what may happen ? But that is nothing to us . sister know , sister , us agreed long ago never to mention a word about it . And so , is it quite certain Charlie is coming ? ” 
 
  “ Charlie dear sister Elizabeth may depend on it , ” replied the other , “ for Mrs. Nicholls was in Meryton last night ; the other saw Mrs. Nicholls passing by , and went out the other on purpose to know the truth of it ; and Mrs. Nicholls told the other that it was certain true . Charlie comes down on Thursday at the latest , very likely on Wednesday . Mrs. Nicholls was going to the butcher ’s , Mrs. Nicholls told the other , on purpose to order in some meat on Wednesday , and Mrs. Nicholls has got three couple of ducks just fit to be killed . ” 
 
  Miss Bennet had not been able to hear of Charlie coming without changing colour . It was many months since Miss Bennet had mentioned Charlie name to Charlie dear sister Elizabeth ; but now , as soon as Both sisters were alone together , Miss Bennet said : 
 
  “ Miss Bennet saw Charlie dear sister Elizabeth look at Miss Bennet to - day , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth , when Mrs. Phillips told us of the news ; and Miss Bennet know Miss Bennet appeared distressed . But do n’t imagine appeared was from any silly cause . Miss Bennet was only confused for the moment , because Miss Bennet felt that Miss Bennet should be looked at . Miss Bennet do assure Charlie dear sister Elizabeth that the news does not affect Miss Bennet either with pleasure or pain . Miss Bennet am glad of one thing , that Charlie comes alone ; because we shall see the less of Charlie . Not that Miss Bennet am afraid of Miss Bennet , but Miss Bennet dread other people ’s remarks . ” 
 
  Charlie dear sister Elizabeth did not know what to make of it . Had Charlie dear sister Elizabeth not seen Charlie in Derbyshire , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth might have supposed Charlie capable of coming there with no other view than what was acknowledged ; but Charlie dear sister Elizabeth still thought Charlie partial to Jane , and Charlie dear sister Elizabeth wavered as to the greater probability of Charlie coming there with Charlie friend ’s permission , or being bold enough to come without it . 
 
  “ Yet it is hard , ” Charlie dear sister Elizabeth sometimes thought , “ that Charlie can not come to a house which Charlie has legally hired , without raising all this speculation ! Charlie dear sister Elizabeth will leave Charlie to Charlie . ” 
 
  In spite of what Charlie dear sister Elizabeth declared , and really believed to be Charlie dear sister Elizabeth feelings in the expectation of Charlie coming , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth could easily perceive that Charlie dear sister Elizabeth spirits were affected by it . They were more disturbed , more unequal , than Charlie dear sister Elizabeth had often seen They . 
 
  The subject which had been so warmly canvassed between They parents , about a twelvemonth ago , was now brought forward again . 
 
  “ As soon as ever Charlie comes , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth dear , ” said Charlie dear sister Elizabeth , “ Charlie dear sister Elizabeth dear will wait on Charlie of course . ” 
 
  “ No , no . Charlie dear sister Elizabeth forced Charlie dear sister Elizabeth dear into visiting Charlie last year , and promised , if Charlie dear sister Elizabeth dear went to see Charlie , Charlie should marry one of Charlie dear sister Elizabeth dear daughters . But it ended in nothing , and Charlie dear sister Elizabeth dear will not be sent on a fool ’s errand again . ” 
 
  Lydia ’s represented to Charlie how absolutely necessary such an attention would be from all the neighbouring gentlemen , on Charlie returning to Netherfield . 
 
  “ ’ Tis an etiquette Charlie despise , ” said Charlie . “ If Charlie wants our society , let Charlie seek our society . Charlie knows where we live . Charlie will not spend Charlie hours in running after Charlie neighbours every time Charlie neighbours go away and come back again . ” 
 
  “ Well , all Charlie dear sister Elizabeth know is , that it will be abominably rude if Charlie dear sister Elizabeth dear do not wait on Charlie . But , however , that sha n’t prevent Charlie dear sister Elizabeth asking Charlie to dine here , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth am determined . We must have Mrs. Long and the Gouldings soon . have will make thirteen with We , so there will be just room at table for Charlie . ” 
 
  Consoled by this resolution , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth was the better able to bear Charlie incivility ; though it was very mortifying to know that Charlie dear sister Elizabeth neighbours might all see Charlie , in consequence of it , before Charlie dear sister Elizabeth neighbours did . As the day of Charlie coming drew near , — 
 
  “ Jane begin to be sorry that Charlie comes at all , ” said Jane to Charlie dear sister Elizabeth . “ It would be nothing ; Jane could see Charlie with perfect indifference , but Jane can hardly bear to hear it thus perpetually talked of . Jane mother means well ; but Charlie dear sister Elizabeth does not know , no one can know , how much Jane suffer from what Charlie dear sister Elizabeth says . Happy shall Charlie dear sister Elizabeth be , when Charlie stay at Netherfield is over ! ” 
 
  “ Charlie dear sister Elizabeth wish Charlie dear sister Elizabeth could say anything to comfort Charlie dear sister Elizabeth , ” replied Charlie dear sister Elizabeth ; “ but it is wholly out of Charlie dear sister Elizabeth power . Charlie dear sister Elizabeth must feel it ; and the usual satisfaction of preaching patience to a sufferer is denied Charlie dear sister Elizabeth , because Charlie dear sister Elizabeth have always so much . ” 
 
  Charlie arrived . Charlie dear sister Elizabeth , through the assistance of servants , contrived to have the earliest tidings of arrived , that the period of anxiety and fretfulness on Charlie dear sister Elizabeth side might be as long as it could . Charlie dear sister Elizabeth counted the days that must intervene before their invitation could be sent ; hopeless of seeing Charlie before . But on the third morning after Charlie arrival in Derbyshire , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth saw Charlie , from Charlie dear sister Elizabeth dressing - room window , enter the paddock and ride towards the house . 
 
  Charlie dear sister Elizabeth daughters were eagerly called to partake of Charlie dear sister Elizabeth joy . Jane resolutely kept Jane place at the table ; but Charlie dear sister Elizabeth , to satisfy Charlie dear sister Elizabeth , went to the window — Charlie dear sister Elizabeth looked,—she saw Fitzwilliam with Charlie , and sat down again by Charlie dear sister Elizabeth sister . 
 
  “ There is a gentleman with Charlie , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth , ” said Kitty ; “ who can a gentleman with Charlie be ? ” 
 
  “ Some acquaintance or other , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth dear , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth suppose ; Charlie dear sister Elizabeth am sure Charlie dear sister Elizabeth do not know . ” 
 
  “ La ! ” replied Kitty , “ a gentleman with Charlie looks just like that man that used to be with Charlie before . Mr. what’s - that man that used to be with Charlie before - name . That tall , proud man . ” 
 
  “ Good gracious ! Fitzwilliam!—and so it does , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth vow . Well , any friend of Charlie will always be welcome here , to be sure ; but else Charlie dear sister Elizabeth must say that Charlie dear sister Elizabeth hate the very sight of a gentleman with Charlie . ” Jane Jane looked at Charlie dear sister Elizabeth with surprise and concern . Jane knew but little of Charlie and Lydia ’s meeting in Derbyshire , and therefore felt for the awkwardness which must attend Jane sister , in seeing Charlie almost for the first time after receiving Charlie explanatory letter . Both sisters were uncomfortable enough . Each felt for the other , and of course for Both sisters ; and Charlie dear sister Elizabeth talked on , of Charlie dear sister Elizabeth dislike of Fitzwilliam , and Charlie dear sister Elizabeth resolution to be civil to Fitzwilliam only as Charlie friend , without being heard by either of Both sisters . But Charlie dear sister Elizabeth had sources of uneasiness which could not be suspected by Jane , to whom Charlie dear sister Elizabeth had never yet had courage to shew Madeline ’s letter , or to relate Charlie dear sister Elizabeth own change of sentiment towards Fitzwilliam . To Jane , Fitzwilliam could be only a man whose proposals Jane had refused , and whose merit Jane had undervalued ; but to Charlie dear sister Elizabeth own more extensive information , Fitzwilliam was the person to whom the whole family were indebted for the first of benefits , and whom Charlie dear sister Elizabeth regarded Charlie dear sister Elizabeth with an interest , if not quite so tender , at least as reasonable and just as what Jane felt for Charlie . Jane astonishment at Fitzwilliam coming — at Fitzwilliam coming to Netherfield , to Longbourn , and voluntarily seeking Jane again , was almost equal to what Jane had known on first witnessing Fitzwilliam altered behaviour in Derbyshire . 
 
  The colour which had been driven from Jane face , returned for half a minute with an additional glow , and a smile of delight added lustre to Jane eyes , as Jane thought for that space of time that Fitzwilliam affection and wishes must still be unshaken . But Jane would not be secure . 
 
  “ Let Jane first see how Fitzwilliam behaves , ” said Jane ; “ it will then be early enough for expectation . ” 
 
  Jane sat intently at work , striving to be composed , and without daring to lift up Jane eyes , till anxious curiosity carried Jane eyes to the face of Jane as the servant was approaching the door . Jane looked a little paler than usual , but more sedate than Charlie dear sister Elizabeth had expected . On the gentlemen ’s appearing , Jane colour increased ; yet Jane received the gentlemen ’s with tolerable ease , and with a propriety of behaviour equally free from any symptom of resentment or any unnecessary complaisance . 
 
  Charlie dear sister Elizabeth said as little to either as civility would allow , and sat down again to Charlie dear sister Elizabeth work , with an eagerness which it did not often command . Charlie dear sister Elizabeth had ventured only one glance at Fitzwilliam . Fitzwilliam looked serious , as usual ; and , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth thought , more as Fitzwilliam had been used to look in Derbyshire , than as Charlie dear sister Elizabeth had seen Fitzwilliam at Pemberley . But , perhaps Fitzwilliam could not in Charlie dear sister Elizabeth mother ’s presence be what Fitzwilliam was before Charlie dear sister Elizabeth uncle and aunt . It was a painful , but not an improbable , conjecture . 
 
  Charlie , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth had likewise seen for an instant , and in that short period saw Charlie looking both pleased and embarrassed . Charlie was received by Charlie dear sister Elizabeth with a degree of civility which made Charlie dear sister Elizabeth two daughters ashamed , especially when contrasted with the cold and ceremonious politeness of Charlie dear sister Elizabeth curtsey and address to Charlie friend ’s . 
 
  Elizabeth , particularly , who knew that Charlie dear sister Elizabeth mother owed to Charlie dear sister Elizabeth the preservation of Lydia ’s from irremediable infamy , was hurt and distressed to a most painful degree by a distinction so ill applied . 
 
  Fitzwilliam , after enquiring of Charlie dear sister Elizabeth how Edward and Madeline did , a question which Charlie dear sister Elizabeth could not answer without confusion , said scarcely anything . Fitzwilliam was not seated by Charlie dear sister Elizabeth ; perhaps that was the reason of Fitzwilliam silence ; but it had not been so in Derbyshire . There Fitzwilliam had talked to Charlie dear sister Elizabeth friends , when Fitzwilliam could not to Charlie dear sister Elizabeth . But now several minutes elapsed without bringing the sound of Fitzwilliam voice ; and when occasionally , unable to resist the impulse of curiosity , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth raised Charlie dear sister Elizabeth eyes to Fitzwilliam face , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth as often found Fitzwilliam looking at Jane as at Charlie dear sister Elizabeth , and frequently on no object but the ground . More thoughtfulness and less anxiety to please , than when Charlie and Lydia ’s last met , were plainly expressed . Charlie dear sister Elizabeth was disappointed , and angry with Charlie dear sister Elizabeth for being so . 
 
  “ Could Charlie dear sister Elizabeth expect it to be otherwise ! ” said Charlie dear sister Elizabeth . “ Yet why did Fitzwilliam come ? ” 
 
  Charlie dear sister Elizabeth was in no humour for conversation with anyone but Fitzwilliam ; and to Fitzwilliam Charlie dear sister Elizabeth had hardly courage to speak . 
 
  Charlie dear sister Elizabeth enquired after Fitzwilliam sister , but could do no more . 
 
  “ It is a long time , Charlie , since Charlie went away , ” said Charlie dear sister Elizabeth . 
 
  Charlie readily agreed to it . 
 
  “ Charlie dear sister Elizabeth began to be afraid Charlie would never come back again . People did say Charlie meant to quit the place entirely at Michaelmas ; but , however , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth hope meant is not true . A great many changes have happened in the neighbourhood , since Charlie went away . Lydia ’s is married and settled . And one of Charlie dear sister Elizabeth own daughters . Charlie dear sister Elizabeth suppose Charlie dear sister Elizabeth dear have heard of it ; indeed , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth dear must have seen it in the papers . It was in The Times and The Courier , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth dear know ; though it was not put in as it ought to be . It was only said , ‘ Lately , George , to Lydia ’s , ’ without there being a syllable said of Lydia ’s father , or the place where Lydia ’s lived , or anything . It was Charlie dear sister Elizabeth brother Gardiner ’s drawing up too , and Charlie dear sister Elizabeth wonder how Charlie dear sister Elizabeth brother Gardiner ’s came to make such an awkward business of it . Did Charlie see it ? ” 
 
  Charlie replied that Charlie did , and made Charlie congratulations . Charlie dear sister Elizabeth dared not lift up Charlie dear sister Elizabeth eyes . How Fitzwilliam looked , therefore , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth could not tell . 
 
  “ It is a delightful thing , to be sure , to have Charlie dear sister Elizabeth well married , ” continued Charlie dear sister Elizabeth mother , “ but at the same time , Charlie , it is very hard to have Lydia ’s taken such a way from Charlie dear sister Elizabeth . Charlie and Lydia ’s are gone down to Newcastle , a place quite northward , it seems , and there Charlie and Lydia ’s are to stay Charlie dear sister Elizabeth do not know how long . Charlie regiment is there ; for Charlie dear sister Elizabeth suppose Charlie dear sister Elizabeth dear have heard of Fitzwilliam leaving the — — shire , and of Fitzwilliam being gone into the regulars . Thank Heaven ! Fitzwilliam has some friends , though perhaps not so many as Fitzwilliam deserves . ” 
 
  Charlie dear sister Elizabeth , was in such misery of shame , that Charlie dear sister Elizabeth could hardly keep Charlie dear sister Elizabeth seat . It drew from Charlie dear sister Elizabeth , however , the exertion of speaking , which nothing else had so effectually done before ; and Charlie dear sister Elizabeth asked Charlie whether Charlie meant to make any stay in the country at present . A few weeks , Charlie believed . 
 
  “ When Charlie have killed all Charlie own birds , Charlie , ” said Charlie dear sister Elizabeth mother , “ Charlie dear sister Elizabeth beg Charlie will come here , and shoot as many as Charlie please on Father ’s manor . Charlie dear sister Elizabeth am sure Father will be vastly happy to oblige Charlie , and will save all the best of the covies for Charlie . ” 
 
  Charlie dear sister Elizabeth misery increased , at such unnecessary , such officious attention ! Were the same fair prospect to arise at present as had flattered them a year ago , every thing , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth was persuaded , would be hastening to the same vexatious conclusion . At that instant , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth felt that years of happiness could not make Jane or Charlie dear sister Elizabeth amends for moments of such painful confusion . 
 
  “ The first wish of Charlie dear sister Elizabeth heart , ” said Charlie dear sister Elizabeth to Charlie dear sister Elizabeth , “ is never more to be in company with either of them . them society can afford no pleasure that will atone for such wretchedness as this ! Let Charlie dear sister Elizabeth never see either one or the other again ! ” 
 
  Yet the misery , for which years of happiness were to offer no compensation , received soon afterwards material relief , from observing how much the beauty of Charlie dear sister Elizabeth sister re - kindled the admiration of Fitzwilliam . When first Fitzwilliam came in , Fitzwilliam had spoken to Lydia ’s but little ; but every five minutes seemed to be giving Lydia ’s more of Fitzwilliam attention . Fitzwilliam found Lydia ’s as handsome as Lydia ’s had been last year ; as good natured , and as unaffected , though not quite so chatty . Jane was anxious that no difference should be perceived in Lydia ’s at all , and was really persuaded that Lydia ’s talked as much as ever . But Lydia ’s mind was so busily engaged , that Lydia ’s did not always know when Lydia ’s was silent . 
 
  When the gentlemen ’s rose to go away , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth was mindful of Charlie dear sister Elizabeth intended civility , and Charlie and Lydia ’s were invited and engaged to dine at Longbourn in a few days time . 
 
  “ Charlie are quite a visit in Charlie dear sister Elizabeth debt , Charlie , ” Charlie dear sister Elizabeth added , “ for when Charlie went to town last winter , Charlie promised to take a family dinner with us , as soon as Charlie returned . Charlie dear sister Elizabeth have not forgot , Charlie see ; and Charlie dear sister Elizabeth assure Charlie dear sister Elizabeth dear , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth was very much disappointed that Charlie did not come back and keep Charlie engagement . ” 
 
  Charlie looked a little silly at this reflection , and said something of Charlie concern at having been prevented by business . Charlie and Lydia ’s then went away . 
 
  Charlie dear sister Elizabeth had been strongly inclined to ask Charlie and Lydia ’s to stay and dine there that day ; but , though Charlie dear sister Elizabeth always kept a very good table , Charlie dear sister Elizabeth did not think anything less than two courses could be good enough for a man on whom Charlie dear sister Elizabeth had such anxious designs , or satisfy the appetite and pride of one who had ten thousand a year . 
 Chapter 
 
  As soon as the gentlemen were gone , Elizabeth walked out to recover Elizabeth spirits ; or in other words , to dwell without interruption on those subjects that must deaden them more . Fitzwilliam ’s behaviour astonished and vexed Elizabeth . 
 
  “ Why , if Fitzwilliam ’s came only to be silent , grave , and indifferent , ” said Elizabeth , “ did Fitzwilliam ’s come at all ? ” 
 
  Elizabeth could settle it in no way that gave Elizabeth pleasure . 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam ’s could be still amiable , still pleasing , to Elizabeth uncle and aunt , when Fitzwilliam ’s was in town ; and why not to Elizabeth ? If Fitzwilliam ’s fears Elizabeth , why come hither ? If Fitzwilliam ’s no longer cares for Elizabeth , why silent ? Teasing , teasing , man ! Elizabeth will think no more about Fitzwilliam ’s . ” 
 
  Elizabeth resolution was for a short time involuntarily kept by the approach of Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed better satisfied with their visitors , than Elizabeth . 
 
  “ Now , ” said Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed , “ that this first meeting is over , Elizabeth feel perfectly easy . Elizabeth know Elizabeth own strength , and Elizabeth shall never be embarrassed again by Fitzwilliam ’s coming . Elizabeth am glad Fitzwilliam ’s dines here on Tuesday . It will then be publicly seen that , on both sides , we meet only as common and indifferent acquaintance . ” 
 
  “ Yes , very indifferent indeed , ” said Elizabeth , laughingly . “ Oh , Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed , take care . Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed 
 
  “ Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed dear Elizabeth , Elizabeth can not think Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed so weak , as to be in danger now ? ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth think Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed are in very great danger of making Fitzwilliam ’s as much in love with Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed as ever . ” 
 
  They did not see the gentlemen again till Tuesday ; and Mother , in the meanwhile , was giving way to all the happy schemes , which the good humour and common politeness of Charles , in half an hour ’s visit , had revived . 
 
  On Tuesday there was a large party assembled at Longbourn ; and the two who were most anxiously expected , to the credit of the two who were most anxiously expected , to the credit of punctuality as sportsmen , were in very good time . When they repaired to the dining - room , Elizabeth eagerly watched to see whether Charles would take the place , which , in all their former parties , had belonged to Charles , by Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed . Elizabeth prudent mother , occupied by the same ideas , forbore to invite Charles to sit by Mother . On entering the dining - room , Charles seemed to hesitate ; but Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed happened to look round , and happened to smile : it was decided . Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed placed Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed by Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed . Elizabeth Elizabeth , with a triumphant sensation , looked towards Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed friend . Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed bore it with noble indifference , and Elizabeth would have imagined that Charles had received Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed sanction to be happy , had Elizabeth not seen Charles eyes likewise turned towards Fitzwilliam ’s , with an expression of half - laughing alarm . 
 
  Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed behaviour to Elizabeth sister was such , during dinner time , as showed an admiration of Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed , which , though more guarded than formerly , persuaded Elizabeth , that if left wholly to Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed , Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed happiness , and Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed own , would be speedily secured . Though Elizabeth dared not depend upon the consequence , Elizabeth yet received pleasure from observing Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed behaviour . Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed behaviour gave Elizabeth all the animation that Elizabeth spirits could boast ; for Elizabeth was in no cheerful humour . Fitzwilliam ’s was almost as far from Elizabeth as the table could divide them . Fitzwilliam ’s was on one side of Elizabeth mother . Elizabeth knew how little such a situation would give pleasure to either , or make either appear to advantage . Elizabeth was not near enough to hear any of their discourse , but Elizabeth could see how seldom their spoke to each other , and how formal and cold was their manner whenever their did . Elizabeth mother ’s ungraciousness , made the sense of what their owed Fitzwilliam ’s more painful to Elizabeth ’s mind ; and Elizabeth would , at times , have given anything to be privileged to tell Fitzwilliam ’s that Fitzwilliam ’s kindness was neither unknown nor unfelt by the whole of the family . 
 
  Elizabeth was in hopes that the evening would afford some opportunity of bringing their together ; that the whole of the visit would not pass away without enabling their to enter into something more of conversation than the mere ceremonious salutation attending Fitzwilliam ’s entrance . Anxious and uneasy , the period which passed in the dining - room , before the gentlemen came , was wearisome and dull to a degree that almost made Elizabeth uncivil . Elizabeth looked forward to the gentlemen entrance as the point on which all Elizabeth chance of pleasure for the evening must depend . 
 
  “ If Fitzwilliam ’s does not come to Elizabeth , then , ” said Elizabeth , “ Elizabeth shall give Fitzwilliam ’s up for ever . ” the gentlemen The gentlemen came ; and Elizabeth thought Fitzwilliam ’s looked as if Fitzwilliam ’s would have answered Elizabeth hopes ; but , alas ! the ladies had crowded round the table , where Miss Bennet was making tea , and Elizabeth pouring out the coffee , in so close a confederacy that there was not a single vacancy near Elizabeth which would admit of a chair . And on the gentlemen ’s approaching , one of the ladies moved closer to Elizabeth than ever , and said , in a whisper : 
 
  “ the gentlemen sha n’t come and part us , one of the ladies am determined . us want none of the gentlemen ; do us ? ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam ’s had walked away to another part of the dining - room . Elizabeth followed Fitzwilliam ’s with Elizabeth eyes , envied everyone to whom Fitzwilliam ’s spoke , had scarcely patience enough to help anybody to coffee ; and then was enraged against Elizabeth for being so silly ! 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam ’s How could Elizabeth ever be foolish enough to expect a renewal of Fitzwilliam ’s love ? Is there one among the sex , who would not protest against such a weakness as a second proposal to the same woman ? There is no indignity so abhorrent to their feelings ! ” 
 
  Elizabeth was a little revived , however , by Fitzwilliam ’s bringing back Fitzwilliam ’s coffee cup Fitzwilliam ’s ; and Elizabeth seized the opportunity of saying : 
 
  “ Is Fitzwilliam ’s sister at Pemberley still ? ” 
 
  “ Yes , Fitzwilliam ’s sister will remain there till Christmas . ” 
 
  “ And quite alone ? Have all Fitzwilliam ’s sister friends left Fitzwilliam ’s sister ? ” 
 
  “ Mrs. Annesley is with Fitzwilliam ’s sister . The others have been gone on to Scarborough , these three weeks . ” 
 
  Elizabeth could think of nothing more to say ; but if Fitzwilliam ’s wished to converse with Elizabeth , Fitzwilliam ’s might have better success . Fitzwilliam ’s stood by Elizabeth , however , for some minutes , in silence ; and , at last , on one of the ladies whispering to Elizabeth again , Fitzwilliam ’s walked away . 
 
  When the tea - things were removed , and the card - tables placed , the ladies all rose , and Elizabeth was then hoping to be soon joined by Fitzwilliam ’s , when all Elizabeth views were overthrown by seeing Fitzwilliam ’s fall a victim to Elizabeth mother ’s rapacity for whist players , and in a few moments after seated with the rest of the party . Elizabeth now lost every expectation of pleasure . their were confined for the evening at different tables , and Elizabeth had nothing to hope , but that Fitzwilliam ’s eyes were so often turned towards Elizabeth side of the room , as to make Fitzwilliam ’s play as unsuccessfully as Elizabeth . 
 
  Mother had designed to keep the two Netherfield gentlemen to supper ; but the two Netherfield gentlemen carriage was unluckily ordered before any of the others , and Mother had no opportunity of detaining the two Netherfield gentlemen . 
 
  “ Well the ladies , ” said Mother , as soon as the ladies were left to the ladies , “ What say Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed to the day ? Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed think every thing has passed off uncommonly well , Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed assure the ladies . The dinner was as well dressed as any Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed ever saw . The venison was roasted to a turn — and everybody said everybody never saw so fat a haunch . The soup was fifty times better than what we had at the Lucases ’ last week ; and Fitzwilliam ’s Fitzwilliam ’s acknowledged , that the partridges were remarkably well done ; and Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed suppose Fitzwilliam ’s has two or three French cooks at least . And , Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed , Mother never saw Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed look in greater beauty . Mrs. Annesley said so too , for Mother asked Mrs. Annesley whether Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed did not . And what do Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed think Mrs. Annesley said besides ? ‘ Ah ! Mother , we shall have Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed at Netherfield at last . ’ Mrs. Annesley did indeed . Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed do think Mrs. Annesley is as good a creature as ever lived — and Mrs. Annesley nieces are very pretty behaved girls , and not at all handsome : Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed like Mrs. Annesley nieces prodigiously . ” Mother Mother , in short , was in very great spirits ; Mother had seen enough of Charles ’s behaviour to Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed , to be convinced that Mother would get Charles at last ; and Mother expectations of advantage to the family , when in a happy humour , were so far beyond reason , that Mother was quite disappointed at not seeing Charles there again the next day , to make Charles proposals . 
 
  “ the day has been a very agreeable day , ” said Miss Bennet to Elizabeth . “ The party seemed so well selected , so suitable one with the other . Miss Bennet hope we may often meet again . ” 
 
  Elizabeth smiled . 
 
  “ Elizabeth , Elizabeth must not do so . Elizabeth must not suspect Elizabeth . It mortifies Elizabeth . Elizabeth assure Elizabeth that Elizabeth have now learnt to enjoy Fitzwilliam ’s conversation as an agreeable and sensible young man , without having a wish beyond it . Elizabeth am perfectly satisfied , from what Fitzwilliam ’s manners now are , that Fitzwilliam ’s never had any design of engaging Elizabeth affection . It is only that Fitzwilliam ’s is blessed with greater sweetness of address , and a stronger desire of generally pleasing , than any other man . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth are very cruel , ” said Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed , “ Elizabeth will not let Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed smile , and are provoking Elizabeth sister , who joined Elizabeth with a cheerful look , which showed to smile every moment . ” 
 
  “ How hard it is in some cases to be believed ! ” 
 
  “ And how impossible in others ! ” 
 
  “ But why should Elizabeth wish to persuade Elizabeth that Elizabeth feel more than Elizabeth acknowledge ? ” 
 
  “ That is a question which Elizabeth hardly know how to answer . We all love to instruct , though We all can teach only what is not worth knowing . Forgive Elizabeth ; and if Elizabeth persist in indifference , do not make Elizabeth Elizabeth confidante . ” 
 Chapter 
 
  A few days after this visit , Charles called again , and alone . Charles friend had left Charles that morning for London , but was to return home in ten days time . Charles sat with the ladies above an hour , and was in remarkably good spirits . Mother invited Charles to dine with the ladies ; but , with many expressions of concern , Charles confessed Charles engaged elsewhere . 
 
  “ Next time Charles call , ” said Mother , “ Mother hope we shall be more lucky . ” 
 
  Charles should be particularly happy at any time , etc . etc . ; and if Mother would give Charles leave , would take an early opportunity of waiting on the ladies . 
 
  “ Can Charles come to - morrow ? ” 
 
  Yes , Charles had no engagement at all for to - morrow ; and invited was accepted with alacrity . 
 
  Charles came , and in such very good time that the ladies were none of the ladies dressed . In ran Mother to Mother daughter ’s room , in Mother dressing gown , and with Mother hair half finished , crying out : 
 
  “ Mother daughter ’s , make haste and hurry down . Charles is come — Charles is come . Charles is , indeed . Make haste , make haste . Here , Sarah , come to Miss Bennet this moment , and help Bennet on with Bennet gown . Never mind Miss Elizabeth ’s hair . ” 
 
  “ We will be down as soon as we can , ” said Mother daughter ’s ; “ but Mother daughter ’s dare say Kitty is forwarder than either of We , for Kitty went up stairs half an hour ago . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! hang Kitty ! what has Kitty to do with it ? Come be quick , be quick ! Where is Mother daughter ’s sash , Mother dear ? ” 
 
  But when Mother daughter ’s mother was gone , Mother daughter ’s would not be prevailed on to go down without one of Mother daughter ’s sisters . 
 
  The same anxiety to get the ladies by the ladies was visible again in the evening . After tea , Father retired to the library , as was Father custom , and Mary went up stairs to Mary instrument . Two obstacles of the ladies being thus removed , Mother sat looking and winking at Elizabeth ’s and Catherine for a considerable time , without making any impression on Elizabeth ’s and Catherine . Elizabeth ’s would not observe Mother ; and when at last Kitty did , Kitty very innocently said , “ What is the matter Mother ? What do Mother keep winking at Kitty for ? What am Kitty to do ? ” 
 
  “ Nothing Kitty , nothing . Mother did not wink at Kitty . ” Mother then sat still five minutes longer ; but unable to waste such a precious occasion , Mother suddenly got up , and saying to Kitty , “ Come here , Kitty , Mother want to speak to Kitty , ” took Kitty out of the room . Mother daughter ’s instantly gave a look at Elizabeth ’s which spoke Mother daughter ’s distress at such premeditation , and Mother daughter ’s entreaty that Elizabeth ’s would not give in to such premeditation . In a few minutes , Mother half - opened the door and called out : 
 
  “ Elizabeth ’s Mother dear , Mother want to speak with Elizabeth ’s . ” 
 
  Elizabeth ’s was forced to go . 
 
  “ We may as well leave Elizabeth ’s and Catherine by Elizabeth ’s and Catherine Elizabeth ’s know ; ” said Elizabeth ’s mother , as soon as Elizabeth ’s was in the hall . “ Kitty and Mother are going up stairs to sit in Mother dressing - room . ” 
 
  Elizabeth ’s made no attempt to reason with Elizabeth ’s mother , but remained quietly in the hall , till Kitty and Mother were out of sight , then returned into the drawing - room . 
 
  Mother ’s schemes for this day were ineffectual . Charles was every thing that was charming , except the professed lover of Mother daughter . Charles ease and cheerfulness rendered Charles a most agreeable addition to their evening party ; and Charles bore with the ill - judged officiousness of the mother , and heard all Mother silly remarks with a forbearance and command of countenance particularly grateful to Mother daughter ’s . 
 
  Charles scarcely needed an invitation to stay supper ; and before Charles went away , an engagement was formed , chiefly through Charles own and Mother ’s means , for Charles coming next morning to shoot with Mother husband . 
 
  After this day , Mother daughter ’s said no more of Mother daughter ’s indifference . Not a word passed between the ladies concerning Charles ; but Elizabeth ’s went to bed in the happy belief that all must speedily be concluded , unless Fitzwilliam returned within the stated time . Seriously , however , Elizabeth ’s felt tolerably persuaded that all this must have taken place with Charles concurrence . 
 
  Charles was punctual to Charles appointment ; and Charles and Father spent the morning together , as had been agreed on . Charles was much more agreeable than Charles companion expected . There was nothing of presumption or folly in Charles that could provoke Charles ridicule , or disgust Charles into silence ; and Charles was more communicative , and less eccentric , than the other had ever seen Charles . Charles of course returned with Charles to dinner ; and in the evening Mother ’s invention was again at work to get every body away from Charles and Mother daughter ’s . Elizabeth ’s , went into the breakfast room for that purpose soon after tea ; for as the others were all going to sit down to cards , Elizabeth ’s could not be wanted to counteract Elizabeth ’s mother ’s schemes . 
 
  But on returning to the drawing - room , when a letter to write was finished , Elizabeth ’s saw , to Elizabeth ’s infinite surprise , there was reason to fear that Elizabeth ’s mother had been too ingenious for Elizabeth ’s . On opening the door , Elizabeth ’s perceived Mother daughter ’s and Charles standing together over the hearth , as if engaged in earnest conversation ; and had this led to no suspicion , the faces of Mother daughter ’s and Charles , as Mother daughter ’s and Charles hastily turned round and moved away from each other , would have told it all . Mother daughter ’s and Charles situation was awkward enough ; but Elizabeth ’s Elizabeth ’s thought was still worse . Not a syllable was uttered by either ; and Elizabeth ’s was on the point of going away again , when Charles , who as well as the other had sat down , suddenly rose , and whispering a few words to Charles sister , ran out of the room . 
 
  Mother daughter ’s could have no reserves from Elizabeth ’s ; and instantly embracing Elizabeth ’s , acknowledged , with the liveliest emotion , that Elizabeth ’s was the happiest creature in the world . 
 
  “ ’ Tis too much ! ” Mother daughter ’s added , “ by far too much . Mother daughter ’s do not deserve it . Oh ! why is not everybody as happy ? ” 
 
  Elizabeth ’s congratulations were given with a sincerity , a warmth , a delight , which words could but poorly express . Every sentence of kindness was a fresh source of happiness to Mother daughter ’s . But Mother daughter ’s would not allow Mother daughter ’s to stay with Elizabeth ’s , or say half that remained to be said for the present . 
 
  “ Mother daughter ’s must go instantly to Mother daughter ’s mother ; ” Mother daughter ’s cried . “ Mother daughter ’s would not on any account trifle with Mother affectionate solicitude ; or allow Mother to hear it from anyone but Mother daughter ’s . He is gone to Mother daughter ’s father already . Oh ! Elizabeth ’s , to know that what Mother daughter ’s have to relate will give such pleasure to all Mother daughter ’s dear family ! how shall Mother daughter ’s bear so much happiness ! ” 
 
  Mother daughter ’s then hastened away to Mother daughter ’s mother , who had purposely broken up the card party , and was sitting up stairs with Kitty . 
 
  Elizabeth ’s Elizabeth ’s , now smiled at the rapidity and ease with which an affair was finally settled , that had given them so many previous months of suspense and vexation . 
 
  “ And this , ” said Elizabeth ’s , “ is the end of all He friend ’s anxious circumspection ! of all He sister ’s falsehood and contrivance ! the happiest , wisest , most reasonable end ! ” 
 
  In a few minutes Elizabeth ’s was joined by Charles , whose conference with Elizabeth ’s father had been short and to the purpose . 
 
  “ Where is He sister ’s ? ” said Charles hastily , as Charles opened the door . 
 
  “ With Charles mother up stairs . He sister ’s will be down in a moment , Charles dare say . ” 
 
  Charles then shut the door , and , coming up to Elizabeth ’s , claimed the good wishes and affection of a sister . Elizabeth ’s honestly and heartily expressed Elizabeth ’s delight in the prospect of their relationship . their shook hands with great cordiality ; and then , till Elizabeth ’s sister came down , Elizabeth ’s had to listen to all Charles had to say of Charles own happiness , and of Mother daughter ’s perfections ; and in spite of Charles being a lover , Elizabeth ’s really believed all Charles expectations of felicity to be rationally founded , because all Charles expectations of felicity had for basis the excellent understanding , and super - excellent disposition of Mother daughter ’s , and a general similarity of feeling and taste between Mother daughter ’s and Charles . 
 
  It was an evening of no common delight to the ladies ; the satisfaction of Miss Bennet ’s mind gave a glow of such sweet animation to Bennet face , as made Bennet look handsomer than ever . Kitty simpered and smiled , and hoped Kitty turn was coming soon . Mother could not give Mother consent or speak Mother approbation in terms warm enough to satisfy Mother feelings , though Mother talked to Charles of nothing else for half an hour ; and when Father joined the ladies at supper , Father voice and manner plainly showed how really happy Father was . 
 
  Not a word , however , passed Father lips in allusion to it , till the ladies visitor took the ladies visitor leave for the night ; but as soon as the ladies visitor was gone , Father turned to Father daughter , and said : 
 
  “ Mother daughter ’s , Father congratulate Mother daughter ’s . Mother daughter ’s will be a very happy woman . ” 
 
  Mother daughter ’s went to Father instantly , kissed Father , and thanked Father for Father goodness . 
 
  “ Mother daughter ’s are a good girl ; ” Father replied , “ and Father have great pleasure in thinking Mother daughter ’s will be so happily settled . Father have not a doubt of Mother daughter ’s doing very well together . Mother daughter ’s tempers are by no means unlike . Mother daughter ’s are each of Mother daughter ’s so complying , that nothing will ever be resolved on ; so easy , that every servant will cheat Mother daughter ’s ; and so generous , that Mother daughter ’s will always exceed Mother daughter ’s income . ” 
 
  “ Father hope not so . Imprudence or thoughtlessness in money matters would be unpardonable in Father . ” 
 
  “ Exceed their income ! Mother dear Father , ” cried Father wife , “ what are Father talking of ? Why , Father has four or five thousand a year , and very likely more . ” Then addressing Mother daughter ’s , “ Oh ! Elizabeth ’s , Father wife am so happy ! Father wife am sure Father wife sha n’t get a wink of sleep all night . Father wife knew how it would be . Father wife always said it must be so , at last . Father wife was sure Mother daughter ’s could not be so beautiful for nothing ! Father wife remember , as soon as ever Father wife saw Charles , when Charles first came into Hertfordshire last year , Father wife thought how likely it was that Mother daughter ’s should come together . Oh ! Charles is the handsomest young man that ever was seen ! ” 
 
  George , Lydia , were all forgotten . Mother daughter ’s was beyond competition Father wife favourite child . At that moment , Mother daughter ’s cared for no other . Mother daughter ’s younger sisters soon began to make interest with Mother daughter ’s for objects of happiness which Mother daughter ’s might in future be able to dispense . 
 
  Mary petitioned for the use of the library at Netherfield ; and Kitty begged very hard for a few balls there every winter . 
 
  Charles , from this time , was of course a daily visitor at Longbourn ; coming frequently before breakfast , and always remaining till after supper ; unless when some barbarous neighbour , who could not be enough detested , had given Charles an invitation to dinner which Charles thought Charles obliged to accept . 
 
  Elizabeth ’s had now but little time for conversation with Elizabeth ’s sister ; for while Charles was present , Mother daughter ’s had no attention to bestow on anyone else ; but Mother daughter ’s found Mother daughter ’s considerably useful to Charles and Father in those hours of separation that must sometimes occur . In the absence of Mother daughter ’s , Charles always attached Charles to Elizabeth ’s , for the pleasure of talking of Elizabeth ’s ; and when Charles was gone , Mother daughter ’s constantly sought the same means of relief . 
 
  “ Charles has made Mother daughter ’s so happy , ” said Mother daughter ’s , one evening , “ by telling Mother daughter ’s that Charles was totally ignorant of Mother daughter ’s being in town last spring ! Mother daughter ’s had not believed it possible . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth ’s suspected as much , ” replied Elizabeth ’s . “ But how did Charles account for it ? ” 
 
  “ It must have been Charles sister ’s doing . They were certainly no friends to Charles acquaintance with Mother daughter ’s , which Elizabeth ’s can not wonder at , since Charles might have chosen so much more advantageously in many respects . But when they see , as Elizabeth ’s trust they will , that Charles is happy with Mother daughter ’s , they will learn to be contented , and their shall be on good terms again ; though their can never be what their once were to their . ” 
 
  “ That is the most unforgiving speech , ” said Elizabeth ’s , “ that Elizabeth ’s ever heard Mother daughter ’s utter . Good girl ! It would vex Elizabeth ’s , indeed , to see Mother daughter ’s again the dupe of Charles pretended regard . ” 
 
  “ Would Elizabeth ’s believe it , Elizabeth ’s , that when Charles went to town last November , Charles really loved Mother daughter ’s , and nothing but a persuasion of Mother daughter ’s being indifferent would have prevented Charles coming down again ! ” 
 
  “ Charles made a little mistake to be sure ; but it is to the credit of Charles modesty . ” 
 
  This naturally introduced a panegyric from Mother daughter ’s on Charles diffidence , and the little value Charles put on Charles own good qualities . Elizabeth ’s was pleased to find that Charles had not betrayed the interference of Charles friend ; for , though Mother daughter ’s had the most generous and forgiving heart in the world , Mother daughter ’s knew it was a circumstance which must prejudice Mother daughter ’s against Charles . 
 
  “ Mother daughter ’s am certainly the most fortunate creature that ever existed ! ” cried Mother daughter ’s . “ Oh ! Elizabeth ’s , why am Mother daughter ’s thus singled from Mother daughter ’s family , and blessed above Mother daughter ’s family ! If Mother daughter ’s could but see Elizabeth ’s as happy ! If there were but such another man for Elizabeth ’s ! ” 
 
  “ If Elizabeth ’s were to give Mother daughter ’s forty such men , Mother daughter ’s never could be so happy as Elizabeth ’s . Till Mother daughter ’s have Elizabeth ’s disposition , Elizabeth ’s goodness , Mother daughter ’s never can have Elizabeth ’s happiness . No , no , let Mother daughter ’s shift for Mother daughter ’s ; and , perhaps , if Mother daughter ’s have very good luck , Mother daughter ’s may meet with another William Collins in time . ” 
 
  The situation of affairs in the Longbourn family could not be long a secret . Mother was privileged to whisper The situation of affairs in the Longbourn family to Mrs. Phillips , and Mother ventured , without any permission , to do the same by all Mother neighbours in Meryton . 
 
  The Bennets were speedily pronounced to be the luckiest family in the world , though only a few weeks before , when Lydia had first run away , the Longbourn family had been generally proved to be marked out for misfortune . 
 Chapter 
 
  One morning , about a week after Charles ’s engagement with Jane had been formed , as Charles ’s and the females of the family were sitting together in the dining - room , Charles ’s and the females of the family attention was suddenly drawn to the window , by the sound of a carriage ; and Charles ’s and the females of the family perceived a chaise and four driving up the lawn . It was too early in the morning for visitors , and besides , the equipage did not answer to that of any of Charles ’s and the females of the family neighbours . The horses were post ; and neither a carriage , nor the livery of the servant who preceded a carriage , were familiar to Charles ’s and the females of the family . As it was certain , however , that Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor was coming , Charles ’s instantly prevailed on Miss Bennet to avoid the confinement of such an intrusion , and walk away with Charles ’s into the shrubbery . They both set off , and the conjectures of the females of the family continued , though with little satisfaction , till the door was thrown open and Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor entered . Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor was Cathleen . 
 
  Charles ’s and the females of the family were of course all intending to be surprised ; but Charles ’s and the females of the family astonishment was beyond Charles ’s and the females of the family expectation ; and on the part of Mother and Kitty , though Cathleen was perfectly unknown to Mother and Kitty , even inferior to what Elizabeth felt . 
 
  Cathleen entered the room with an air more than usually ungracious , made no other reply to Elizabeth ’s salutation than a slight inclination of the head , and sat down without saying a word . Elizabeth had mentioned Elizabeth name to Elizabeth mother on Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor entrance , though no request of introduction had been made . 
 
  Mother , all amazement , though flattered by having Cathleen , received Cathleen with the utmost politeness . After sitting for a moment in silence , Mother said very stiffly to Elizabeth , 
 
  “ Mother hope Elizabeth are well , Miss Bennet . Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor , Mother suppose , is Elizabeth mother . ” 
 
  Elizabeth replied very concisely that Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor was . 
 
  “ And that Elizabeth suppose is one of Mother sisters . ” 
 
  “ Yes , Elizabeth , ” said Mother , delighted to speak to Cathleen . “ Cathleen is Mother youngest girl but one . Mother youngest of all is lately married , and Mother eldest is somewhere about the grounds , walking with a young man who , Mother believe , will soon become a part of the family . ” 
 
  “ Mother have a very small park here , ” returned Cathleen after a short silence . 
 
  “ a very small park is nothing in comparison of Rosings , Cathleen lady , Cathleen dare say ; but Cathleen assure Mother a very small park is much larger than Sir William Lucas ’s . ” 
 
  “ This must be a most inconvenient sitting room for the evening , in summer ; the windows are full west . ” 
 
  Mother assured Elizabeth that they never sat there after dinner , and then added : 
 
  “ May Mother take the liberty of asking Elizabeth whether Elizabeth left Mr. and Mrs. Collins well . ” 
 
  “ Yes , very well . Elizabeth saw Mr. and Mrs. Collins the night before last . ” Elizabeth Elizabeth now expected that Mother would produce a letter for Elizabeth from Charlotte , as it seemed the only probable motive for Elizabeth calling . But no letter appeared , and Elizabeth was completely puzzled . 
 
  Mother , with great civility , begged Mother ladyship to take some refreshment ; but Cathleen very resolutely , and not very politely , declined eating anything ; and then , rising up , said to Elizabeth , 
 
  “ Miss Bennet , there seemed to be a prettyish kind of a little wilderness on one side of the lawn . Cathleen should be glad to take a turn in a prettyish kind of a little wilderness on one side of the lawn , if Elizabeth will favour Cathleen with Elizabeth company . ” 
 
  “ Go , Mother dear , ” cried Elizabeth mother , “ and show Elizabeth about the different walks . Mother think Elizabeth will be pleased with a prettyish kind of a little wilderness on one side of the lawn . ” 
 
  Elizabeth obeyed , and running into Elizabeth own room for Elizabeth parasol , attended Elizabeth noble guest downstairs . As they passed through the hall , Cathleen opened the doors into the dining - parlour and drawing - room , and pronouncing the dining - parlour and drawing - room , after a short survey , to be decent looking rooms , walked on . 
 
  Cathleen carriage remained at the door , and Elizabeth saw that Elizabeth waiting - woman was in Cathleen carriage . They proceeded in silence along the gravel walk that led to the copse ; Elizabeth was determined to make no effort for conversation with Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor . 
 
  “ How could Elizabeth ever think Elizabeth like Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew ? ” said Elizabeth , as Elizabeth looked in Elizabeth face . 
 
  As soon as they entered the copse , Cathleen began in the following manner : — 
 
  “ Elizabeth can be at no loss , Miss Bennet , to understand the reason of Cathleen journey hither . Elizabeth own heart , Elizabeth own conscience , must tell Miss Bennet why Cathleen come . ” 
 
  Elizabeth looked with unaffected astonishment . 
 
  “ Indeed , Cathleen are mistaken , Cathleen . Elizabeth have not been at all able to account for the honour of seeing Miss Bennet here . ” 
 
  “ Miss Bennet , ” replied Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor , in an angry tone , “ Miss Bennet ought to know , that Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor am not to be trifled with . But however insincere Miss Bennet may choose to be , Miss Bennet shall not find Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor so . Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor character has ever been celebrated for Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor character sincerity and frankness , and in a cause of such moment as this , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor shall certainly not depart from Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor character . A report of a most alarming nature reached Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor two days ago . Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor was told that not only Cathleen was on the point of being most advantageously married , but that Elizabeth , that Miss Elizabeth , would , in all likelihood , be soon afterwards united to Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam . Though Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor know it must be a scandalous falsehood , though Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor would not injure Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam so much as to suppose the truth of it possible , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor instantly resolved on setting off for this place , that Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor might make Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor sentiments known to Miss Bennet . ” 
 
  “ If Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor believed it impossible to be true , ” said Elizabeth , colouring with astonishment and disdain , “ Elizabeth wonder Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor took the trouble of coming so far . What could Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor ladyship propose by it ? ” 
 
  “ At once to insist upon having such a report universally contradicted . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth coming to this place , to see Elizabeth and Elizabeth family , ” said Elizabeth coolly , “ will be rather a confirmation of it ; if , indeed , such a report is in existence . ” 
 
  “ If ! Do you then pretend to be ignorant of such a report ? Has such a report not been industriously circulated by yourselves ? Do you not know that such a report is spread abroad ? ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth never heard that such a report was . ” 
 
  “ And can Elizabeth likewise declare , that there is no foundation for such a report ? ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth do not pretend to possess equal frankness with Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor . Miss Bennet may ask questions which Elizabeth shall not choose to answer . ” 
 
  “ This is not to be borne . Miss Bennet , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor insist on being satisfied . Has Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam , has Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam , made Miss Bennet an offer of marriage ? ” 
 
  “ Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor has declared an offer of marriage to be impossible . ” 
 
  “ an offer of marriage ought to be so ; an offer of marriage must be so , while Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam retains the use of Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam reason . But Miss Bennet arts and allurements may , in a moment of infatuation , have made Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam forget what Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam owes to Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam and to all Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam family . Miss Bennet may have drawn Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam in . ” 
 
  “ If Miss Bennet have , Miss Bennet shall be the last person to confess it . ” 
 
  “ Miss Bennet , do Miss Bennet know who Cathleen am ? Cathleen have not been accustomed to such language as this . Cathleen am almost the nearest relation Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam has in the world , and am entitled to know all Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam dearest concerns . ” 
 
  “ But Elizabeth are not entitled to know Miss Bennet ; nor will such behaviour as this , ever induce Cathleen to be explicit . ” 
 
  “ Let Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor be rightly understood . This match , to which Elizabeth have the presumption to aspire , can never take place . No , never . Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam is engaged to Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor daughter . Now what have Cathleen to say ? ” 
 
  “ Only this ; that if Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam is so , Cathleen can have no reason to suppose Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam will make an offer to Miss Bennet . ” 
 
  Cathleen hesitated for a moment , and then replied : 
 
  “ The engagement between them is of a peculiar kind . From them infancy , them have been intended for each other . It was the favourite wish of Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam mother , as well as of Cathleen . While in them cradles , we planned the union : and now , at the moment when the wishes of both sisters would be accomplished in both sisters marriage , to be prevented by Cathleen ! Do Elizabeth pay no regard to the wishes of Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam friends ? To Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam tacit engagement with Cathleen ? Are Elizabeth lost to every feeling of propriety and delicacy ? Have Elizabeth not heard Cathleen say that from Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam earliest hours Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam was destined for Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam cousin ? ” 
 
  “ Yes , and Elizabeth had heard it before . But what is that to Elizabeth ? If there is no other objection to Elizabeth marrying Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam , Elizabeth shall certainly not be kept from it by knowing that Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam mother and aunt wished Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam to marry Cathleen . Mother and Kitty did as much as Mother and Kitty could in planning the union . the union completion depended on others . If Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam is neither by honour nor inclination confined to Cathleen , why is not Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam to make another choice ? And if Miss Bennet am another choice , why may not Miss Bennet accept Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam ? ” 
 
  “ Because honour , decorum , prudence , nay , interest , forbid accept . Yes , Miss Bennet , interest ; for do not expect to be noticed by Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam family or friends , if Elizabeth wilfully act against the inclinations of all . Elizabeth will be censured , slighted , and despised , by everyone connected with Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam . Miss Bennet alliance will be a disgrace ; Miss Bennet name will never even be mentioned by any of us . ” 
 
  “ These are heavy misfortunes , ” replied Elizabeth . “ But Cathleen must have such extraordinary sources of happiness necessarily attached to Cathleen situation , that Cathleen could , upon the whole , have no cause to repine . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor am ashamed of Elizabeth ! Is this Elizabeth gratitude for Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor attentions to Elizabeth last spring ? Is nothing due to Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor on that score ? Let they sit down . Elizabeth are to understand , Miss Bennet , that Elizabeth came here with the determined resolution of carrying Elizabeth purpose ; nor will Elizabeth be dissuaded from Elizabeth purpose . Elizabeth have not been used to submit to any person ’s whims . Elizabeth have not been in the habit of brooking disappointment . ” 
 
  “ That will make Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor situation at present more pitiable ; but That will have no effect on Elizabeth . ” 
 
  “ Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor will not be interrupted . Hear Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor in silence . Cathleen and Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam are formed for each other . Cathleen and Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam are descended , on the maternal side , from the same noble line ; and , on the father ’s , from respectable , honourable , and ancient — though untitled — families . Cathleen and Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam fortune on both sides is splendid . Cathleen and Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam are destined for each other by the voice of every member of Cathleen and Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam respective houses ; and what is to divide Cathleen and Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam ? The upstart pretensions of a young woman without family , connections , or fortune . Is The upstart pretensions of a young woman without family , connections , or fortune . to be endured ! But The upstart pretensions of a young woman without family , connections , or fortune . must not , shall not be . If Elizabeth were sensible of Elizabeth own good , Elizabeth would not wish to quit the sphere in which Elizabeth have been brought up . ” 
 
  “ In marrying Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam , Elizabeth should not consider Elizabeth as quitting the sphere in which Elizabeth have been brought up . Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam is a gentleman ; Elizabeth am a gentleman ’s daughter ; so far we are equal . ” 
 
  “ True . Elizabeth are a gentleman ’s daughter . But who was Elizabeth mother ? Who are Elizabeth uncles and aunts ? Do not imagine Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor ignorant of Elizabeth uncles and aunts condition . ” 
 
  “ Whatever Elizabeth connections may be , ” said Elizabeth , “ if Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam does not object to Elizabeth connections , Elizabeth connections can be nothing to Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor . ” 
 
  “ Tell Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor once for all , are Elizabeth engaged to Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam ? ” 
 
  Though Elizabeth would not , for the mere purpose of obliging Cathleen , have answered this question , Elizabeth could not but say , after a moment ’s deliberation : 
 
  “ Elizabeth am not . ” 
 
  Cathleen seemed pleased . 
 
  “ And will Elizabeth promise Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor , never to enter into such an engagement ? Elizabeth 
 
  “ Elizabeth will make no promise of the kind . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor am shocked and astonished . Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor expected to find a more reasonable young woman . But do not deceive Elizabeth into a belief that Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor will ever recede . Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor shall not go away till Elizabeth have given Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor the assurance Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor require . ” 
 
  “ And Elizabeth certainly never shall give the assurance Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor require . Elizabeth am not to be intimidated into anything so wholly unreasonable . Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor wants Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam to marry Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor daughter ; but would Elizabeth giving Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor the assurance Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor require make them marriage at all more probable ? Supposing Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam to be attached to Elizabeth , would Elizabeth refusing to accept Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam hand make Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam wish to bestow Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam hand on Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam cousin ? Allow Elizabeth to say , Cathleen , that the arguments with which Cathleen have supported this extraordinary application have been as frivolous as this extraordinary application was ill - judged . Cathleen have widely mistaken Elizabeth character , if Cathleen think Elizabeth can be worked on by such persuasions as these . How far Cathleen nephew might approve of Cathleen interference in Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam affairs , Elizabeth can not tell ; but Cathleen have certainly no right to concern Cathleen in Miss Bennet . Elizabeth must beg , therefore , to be importuned no farther on the subject . ” 
 
  “ Not so hasty , if Elizabeth please . Elizabeth have by no means done . To all the objections Elizabeth have already urged , Elizabeth have still another to add . Elizabeth am no stranger to the particulars of Cathleen infamous elopement . Elizabeth know it all ; that Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam marrying Cathleen was a patched - up business , at the expence of Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor father and uncles . And is Cathleen to be Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam sister ? Is a young man who , Mother believe , will soon become a part of the family , to be Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam brother ? Heaven and earth!—of what are Elizabeth thinking ? Are the shades of Pemberley to be thus polluted ? ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth can now have nothing further to say , ” Elizabeth resentfully answered . “ Elizabeth have insulted Elizabeth in every possible method . Elizabeth must beg to return to the house . ” 
 
  And Elizabeth rose as Elizabeth spoke . Cathleen rose also , and they turned back . Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor was highly incensed . 
 
  “ Elizabeth have no regard , then , for the honour and credit of Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam ! Unfeeling , selfish girl ! Do Elizabeth not consider that a connection with Elizabeth must disgrace Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam in the eyes of everybody ? ” 
 
  “ Cathleen , Elizabeth have nothing further to say . Cathleen know Elizabeth sentiments . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth are then resolved to have Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam ? ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth have said no such thing . Elizabeth am only resolved to act in that manner , which will , in Elizabeth own opinion , constitute Elizabeth happiness , without reference to Cathleen , or to any person so wholly unconnected with Elizabeth . ” 
 
  “ It is well . Elizabeth refuse , then , to oblige Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor . Elizabeth refuse to obey the claims of duty , honour , and gratitude . Elizabeth are determined to ruin Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam in the opinion of all Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam friends , and make Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam the contempt of the world . ” 
 
  “ Neither duty , nor honour , nor gratitude , ” replied Elizabeth , “ have any possible claim on Elizabeth , in the present instance . No principle of either would be violated by Elizabeth marriage with Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam . And with regard to the resentment of Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam family , or the indignation of the world , if the former were excited by Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor nephew , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor own nephew , Fitzwilliam marrying Elizabeth , it would not give Elizabeth one moment ’s concern — and the world in general would have too much sense to join in the scorn . ” 
 
  “ And this is Elizabeth real opinion ! This is Elizabeth final resolve ! Very well . Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor shall now know how to act . Do not imagine , Elizabeth , that Elizabeth ambition will ever be gratified . Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor came to try Elizabeth . Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor hoped to find Elizabeth reasonable ; but , depend upon it , Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor will carry Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor point . ” 
 
  In this manner Cathleen talked on , till they were at the door of Cathleen carriage , when , turning hastily round , Cathleen added , “ Cathleen take no leave of Miss Bennet , Miss Bennet . Cathleen send no compliments to Miss Bennet mother . Miss Bennet deserve no such attention . Cathleen am most seriously displeased . ” 
 
  Elizabeth made no answer ; and without attempting to persuade Charles ’s and the females of the family visitor to return into the house , walked quietly into the house Elizabeth . Elizabeth heard Cathleen carriage drive away as Elizabeth proceeded up stairs . Elizabeth mother impatiently met Elizabeth at the door of the dressing - room , to ask why Cathleen would not come in again and rest Cathleen . 
 
  “ Cathleen did not choose it , ” said Elizabeth daughter , “ Cathleen would go . ” 
 
  “ Cathleen is a very fine - looking woman ! and Cathleen calling here was prodigiously civil ! for Cathleen only came , Elizabeth suppose , to tell us Mrs. Collins were well . Cathleen is on Cathleen road somewhere , Cathleen dare say , and so , passing through Meryton , thought Cathleen might as well call on Elizabeth . Elizabeth suppose Cathleen had nothing particular to say to Elizabeth , Elizabeth ? ” 
 
  Elizabeth was forced to give into a little falsehood here ; for to acknowledge the substance of they conversation was impossible . 
 Chapter 
 
  The discomposure of spirits which this extraordinary visit threw Elizabeth into , could not be easily overcome ; nor could Elizabeth , for many hours , learn to think of this extraordinary visit less than incessantly . Cathleen , it appeared , had actually taken the trouble of this journey from Rosings , for the sole purpose of breaking off Cathleen supposed engagement with Fitzwilliam . It was a rational scheme , to be sure ! but from what the report of their engagement could originate , Elizabeth was at a loss to imagine ; till Elizabeth recollected that Fitzwilliam being the intimate friend of Charles , and Cathleen being the sister of Jane , was enough , at a time when the expectation of one wedding made everybody eager for another , to supply the idea . Elizabeth had not Elizabeth forgotten to feel that the marriage of Jane must bring them more frequently together . And Elizabeth neighbours at Lucas Lodge , therefore ( for through Elizabeth neighbours at Lucas Lodge communication with the Collinses , the report of their engagement , Elizabeth concluded , had reached Cathleen ) , had only set that down as almost certain and immediate , which Elizabeth had looked forward to as possible at some future time . 
 
  In revolving Cathleen ’s expressions , however , Elizabeth could not help feeling some uneasiness as to the possible consequence of Cathleen persisting in this interference . From what Cathleen had said of Cathleen resolution to prevent their marriage , it occurred to Elizabeth that Elizabeth must meditate an application to Elizabeth nephew ; and how Elizabeth nephew might take a similar representation of the evils attached to a connection with Elizabeth , Elizabeth dared not pronounce . Elizabeth knew not the exact degree of Elizabeth nephew affection for Elizabeth , or Elizabeth nephew dependence on Elizabeth judgment , but it was natural to suppose that Elizabeth nephew thought much higher of Elizabeth than Elizabeth could do ; and it was certain that , in enumerating the miseries of a marriage with one , whose immediate connections were so unequal to Elizabeth nephew own , Elizabeth would address Elizabeth nephew on Elizabeth nephew weakest side . With Elizabeth nephew notions of dignity , Elizabeth nephew would probably feel that the arguments , which to Elizabeth had appeared weak and ridiculous , contained much good sense and solid reasoning . 
 
  If Elizabeth nephew had been wavering before as to what Elizabeth nephew should do , which had often seemed likely , the advice and entreaty of so near a relation might settle every doubt , and determine Elizabeth nephew at once to be as happy as dignity unblemished could make Elizabeth nephew . In that case Elizabeth nephew would return no more . Cathleen might see Elizabeth nephew in Cathleen way through town ; and Elizabeth nephew engagement to Charles of coming again to Netherfield must give way . 
 
  “ If , therefore , an excuse for not keeping Elizabeth nephew promise should come to Elizabeth nephew friend within a few days , ” Elizabeth added , “ Elizabeth shall know how to understand an excuse for not keeping Elizabeth nephew promise . Elizabeth shall then give over every expectation , every wish of Elizabeth nephew constancy . If Elizabeth nephew is satisfied with only regretting Elizabeth , when Elizabeth nephew might have obtained Elizabeth affections and hand , Elizabeth shall soon cease to regret Elizabeth nephew at all . ” 
 
  The surprise of the rest of the family , on hearing who the rest of the family visitor had been , was very great ; but the rest of the family obligingly satisfied The surprise of the rest of the family , with the same kind of supposition which had appeased Cathleen curiosity ; and Elizabeth was spared from much teasing on the subject . 
 
  The next morning , as Elizabeth was going downstairs , Elizabeth was met by Elizabeth father , who came out of Elizabeth father , who came out of library with a letter in Elizabeth father , who came out of hand . 
 
  “ Elizabeth , ” said Elizabeth father , who came out of , “ Elizabeth father , who came out of was going to look for Elizabeth ; come into Elizabeth father , who came out of room . ” 
 
  Elizabeth followed Elizabeth father , who came out of thither ; and Elizabeth curiosity to know what Elizabeth father , who came out of had to tell Elizabeth was heightened by the supposition of its being in some manner connected with a letter in Elizabeth father , who came out of hand . It suddenly struck Elizabeth that a letter in Elizabeth father , who came out of hand might be from Cathleen ; and Elizabeth anticipated with dismay all the consequent explanations . 
 
  Elizabeth followed Elizabeth father , who came out of to the fire place , and they both sat down . Elizabeth father , who came out of then said , 
 
  “ Elizabeth father , who came out of have received a letter this morning that has astonished Elizabeth father , who came out of exceedingly . As Elizabeth father , who came out of letter principally concerns Elizabeth , Elizabeth ought to know Elizabeth father , who came out of letter contents . Elizabeth father , who came out of did not know before , that Elizabeth father , who came out of had two daughters on the brink of matrimony . Let Elizabeth father , who came out of congratulate Elizabeth on a very important conquest . ” 
 
  The colour now rushed into Elizabeth ’s cheeks in the instantaneous conviction of Elizabeth father , who came out of letter being a letter from Elizabeth nephew , instead of Cathleen ; and Elizabeth was undetermined whether most to be pleased that Elizabeth father , who came out of explained Elizabeth father , who came out of at all , or offended that Elizabeth father , who came out of letter was not rather addressed to Elizabeth ; when Elizabeth father , who came out of continued : 
 
  “ Elizabeth look conscious . Young ladies have great penetration in such matters as these ; but Elizabeth father , who came out of think Elizabeth father , who came out of may defy even Elizabeth sagacity , to discover the name of Elizabeth admirer . This letter is from William Collins . ” 
 
  “ From William Collins ! and what can William Collins have to say ? ” 
 
  “ Something very much to the purpose of course . Elizabeth father , who came out of begins with congratulations on the approaching nuptials of Elizabeth , of which , it seems , Elizabeth father , who came out of has been told by some of the good - natured , gossiping Lucases . Elizabeth father , who came out of shall not sport with Elizabeth impatience , by reading what Elizabeth father , who came out of says on that point . What relates to Elizabeth , is as follows : ‘ Having thus offered Elizabeth the sincere congratulations of the Collinses and Elizabeth father , who came out of on the approaching nuptials of Elizabeth , of which , it seems , Elizabeth father , who came out of has been told by some of the good - natured , gossiping Lucases , let Elizabeth father , who came out of now add a short hint on the subject of another ; of which we have been advertised by the same authority . Elizabeth daughter Elizabeth , it is presumed , will not long bear the name of Bennet , after Elizabeth elder sister has resigned the name of Bennet , and the chosen partner of Elizabeth fate may be reasonably looked up to as one of the most illustrious personages in this land . ’ 
 
  “ Can Elizabeth possibly guess , Elizabeth , who is meant by this ? ‘ the chosen partner of Elizabeth fate is blessed , in a peculiar way , with every thing the heart of mortal can most desire,—splendid property , noble kindred , and extensive patronage . Yet in spite of all these temptations , let Elizabeth father , who came out of warn Elizabeth father , who came out of cousin Elizabeth , and Elizabeth , of what evils Elizabeth father , who came out of cousin Elizabeth , and Elizabeth may incur by a precipitate closure with the chosen partner of Elizabeth fate proposals , which , of course , Elizabeth father , who came out of cousin Elizabeth , and Elizabeth will be inclined to take immediate advantage of . ’ 
 
  “ Have Elizabeth any idea , Elizabeth , who the chosen partner of Elizabeth fate is ? But now it comes out : 
 
  “ ‘ Elizabeth father , who came out of motive for cautioning Elizabeth is as follows . We have reason to imagine that the chosen partner of Elizabeth fate aunt , Cathleen , does not look on the match with a friendly eye . ’ 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam , Elizabeth see , is the man ! Now , Elizabeth , Elizabeth father , who came out of think Elizabeth father , who came out of have surprised Elizabeth . Could Fitzwilliam , or some of the good - natured , gossiping Lucases , have pitched on any man within the circle of our acquaintance , whose name would have given the lie more effectually to what they related ? Fitzwilliam , who never looks at any woman but to see a blemish , and who probably never looked at Elizabeth in Fitzwilliam life ! It is admirable ! ” 
 
  Elizabeth tried to join in Elizabeth father , who came out of pleasantry , but could only force one most reluctant smile . Never had Elizabeth father , who came out of wit been directed in a manner so little agreeable to Elizabeth . 
 
  “ Are Elizabeth not diverted ? ” 
 
  “ Oh ! yes . Pray read on . ” 
 
  “ ‘ After mentioning the likelihood of this marriage to Elizabeth ladyship last night , Elizabeth immediately , with Elizabeth usual condescension , expressed what Elizabeth felt on the occasion ; when it became apparent , that on the score of some family objections on the part of Elizabeth , Elizabeth would never give Elizabeth consent to what Elizabeth termed so disgraceful a match . Elizabeth father , who came out of thought it Elizabeth father , who came out of duty to give the speediest intelligence of this to Elizabeth , that Elizabeth and Elizabeth admirer may be aware of what Elizabeth and Elizabeth admirer are about , and not run hastily into a marriage which has not been properly sanctioned . ’ William Collins moreover adds , ‘ William Collins am truly rejoiced that William Collins cousin Lydia ’s sad business has been so well hushed up , and am only concerned that Elizabeth and Elizabeth admirer living together before their marriage took place should be so generally known . William Collins must not , however , neglect the duties of William Collins station , or refrain from declaring William Collins amazement at hearing that Elizabeth received the young couple into Elizabeth house as soon as the young couple were married . received was an encouragement of vice ; and had William Collins been the rector of Longbourn , William Collins should very strenuously have opposed received . Elizabeth ought certainly to forgive the young couple , as a Christian , but never to admit the young couple in Elizabeth sight , or allow the young couple names to be mentioned in Elizabeth hearing . ’ That is William Collins notion of Christian forgiveness ! The rest of William Collins letter is only about William Collins dear Charlotte ’s situation , and William Collins expectation of a young olive - branch . But , Elizabeth , Elizabeth look as if Elizabeth did not enjoy it . Elizabeth are not going to be missish , Elizabeth father , who came out of hope , and pretend to be affronted at an idle report . For what do we live , but to make sport for our neighbours , and laugh at our neighbours in our turn ? ” 
 
  “ Oh ! ” cried Elizabeth , “ Elizabeth am excessively diverted . But it is so strange ! ” 
 
  “ Yes — that is what makes it amusing . Had the young couple fixed on any other man it would have been nothing ; but Fitzwilliam perfect indifference , and Elizabeth pointed dislike , make it so delightfully absurd ! Much as Elizabeth father , who came out of abominate writing , Elizabeth father , who came out of would not give up William Collins ’s correspondence for any consideration . Nay , when Elizabeth father , who came out of read a letter of William Collins , Elizabeth father , who came out of can not help giving William Collins the preference even over Fitzwilliam , much as Elizabeth father , who came out of value the impudence and hypocrisy of Elizabeth father , who came out of son - in - law . And pray , Elizabeth , what said Cathleen about the report of their engagement ? Did Cathleen call to refuse Cathleen consent ? ” 
 
  To this question Elizabeth father , who came out of daughter replied only with a laugh ; and as it had been asked without the least suspicion , Elizabeth was not distressed by Elizabeth father , who came out of repeating it . Elizabeth had never been more at a loss to make Elizabeth feelings appear what Elizabeth feelings were not . It was necessary to laugh , when Elizabeth would rather have cried . Elizabeth father , who came out of had most cruelly mortified Elizabeth , by what Elizabeth father , who came out of said of Fitzwilliam ’s indifference , and Elizabeth could do nothing but wonder at such a want of penetration , or fear that perhaps , instead of Fitzwilliam seeing too little , Elizabeth might have fancied too much . 
 Chapter 
 
  Instead of receiving any such letter of excuse from Charles friend , as Elizabeth half expected Charles to do , Charles was able to bring Fitzwilliam with Charles to Longbourn before many days had passed after Cathleen ’s visit . The gentlemen arrived early ; and , before Mother had time to tell Charles of The gentlemen having seen Mother aunt , of which Mother daughter sat in momentary dread , Charles , who wanted to be alone with Jane , proposed The gentlemen walking out . proposed was agreed to . Mother was not in the habit of walking ; Mary could never spare time ; but The gentlemen set off together . Charles and Jane , however , soon allowed The gentlemen to outstrip Charles and Jane . Charles and Jane lagged behind , while Elizabeth , Kitty , and Fitzwilliam were to entertain each other . Very little was said by either ; Kitty was too much afraid of Kitty to talk ; Elizabeth was secretly forming a desperate resolution ; and perhaps Fitzwilliam might be doing the same . 
 
  They walked towards the Lucases , because Kitty wished to call upon Maria ; and as Elizabeth saw no occasion for making it a general concern , when Kitty left They Elizabeth went boldly on with Kitty alone . Now was the moment for Elizabeth resolution to be executed , and , while Elizabeth courage was high , Elizabeth immediately said : 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam , Elizabeth am a very selfish creature ; and , for the sake of giving relief to Elizabeth own feelings , care not how much Elizabeth may be wounding Fitzwilliam . Elizabeth can no longer help thanking Fitzwilliam for Fitzwilliam unexampled kindness to Maria . Ever since Elizabeth have known Fitzwilliam unexampled kindness to Maria , Elizabeth have been most anxious to acknowledge to Fitzwilliam how gratefully Elizabeth feel Fitzwilliam unexampled kindness to Maria . Were it known to the rest of Elizabeth family , Elizabeth should not have merely Elizabeth own gratitude to express . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam am sorry , exceedingly sorry , ” replied Fitzwilliam , in a tone of surprise and emotion , “ that Elizabeth have ever been informed of what may , in a mistaken light , have given Elizabeth uneasiness . Fitzwilliam did not think Madeline was so little to be trusted . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam must not blame Elizabeth aunt . Madeline thoughtlessness first betrayed to Elizabeth that Fitzwilliam had been concerned in the matter ; and , of course , Elizabeth could not rest till Elizabeth knew the particulars . Let Elizabeth thank Fitzwilliam again and again , in the name of all Elizabeth family , for that generous compassion which induced Elizabeth to take so much trouble , and bear so many mortifications , for the sake of discovering so many mortifications . ” 
 
  “ If Elizabeth will thank Fitzwilliam , ” Fitzwilliam replied , “ let it be for Elizabeth alone . That the wish of giving happiness to Elizabeth might add force to the other inducements which led Fitzwilliam on , Fitzwilliam shall not attempt to deny . But Elizabeth family owe Fitzwilliam nothing . Much as Fitzwilliam respect Elizabeth family , Fitzwilliam believe Fitzwilliam thought only of Elizabeth . ” 
 
  Elizabeth was too much embarrassed to say a word . After a short pause , Elizabeth companion added , “ Elizabeth are too generous to trifle with Fitzwilliam . If Elizabeth feelings are still what Elizabeth feelings were last April , tell Fitzwilliam so at once . Fitzwilliam affections and wishes are unchanged , but one word from Elizabeth will silence Fitzwilliam on this subject for ever . ” 
 
  Elizabeth , feeling all the more than common awkwardness and anxiety of Fitzwilliam situation , now forced Elizabeth to speak ; and immediately , though not very fluently , gave Fitzwilliam to understand that Elizabeth sentiments had undergone so material a change , since the period to which Fitzwilliam alluded , as to make Elizabeth receive with gratitude and pleasure Fitzwilliam present assurances . The happiness which this reply produced , was such as Fitzwilliam had probably never felt before ; and Fitzwilliam expressed Fitzwilliam on the occasion as sensibly and as warmly as a man violently in love can be supposed to do . Had Elizabeth been able to encounter Fitzwilliam eye , Elizabeth might have seen how well the expression of heartfelt delight , diffused over Fitzwilliam face , became Fitzwilliam ; but , though Elizabeth could not look , Elizabeth could listen , and Fitzwilliam told Elizabeth of feelings , which , in proving of what importance Elizabeth was to Fitzwilliam , made Fitzwilliam affection every moment more valuable . 
 
  They walked on , without knowing in what direction . There was too much to be thought , and felt , and said , for attention to any other objects . Elizabeth soon learnt that they were indebted for They present good understanding to the efforts of Fitzwilliam aunt , who did call on Fitzwilliam in her ladyship ’s return through London , and there relate her ladyship ’s journey to Longbourn , her ladyship ’s journey to Longbourn motive , and the substance of her ladyship ’s conversation with Elizabeth ; dwelling emphatically on every expression of Elizabeth which , in her ladyship ’s apprehension , peculiarly denoted her ladyship ’s perverseness and assurance ; in the belief that such a relation must assist her ladyship ’s endeavours to obtain that promise from her ladyship ’s nephew which her ladyship ’s had refused to give . But , unluckily for her ladyship ’s ladyship , her ladyship ’s journey to Longbourn effect had been exactly contrariwise . 
 
  “ her ladyship ’s journey to Longbourn taught Elizabeth to hope , ” said Fitzwilliam , “ as Elizabeth had scarcely ever allowed Elizabeth to hope before . Elizabeth knew enough of Elizabeth disposition to be certain that , had Elizabeth been absolutely , irrevocably decided against Elizabeth , Elizabeth would have acknowledged decided to Cathleen ’s , frankly and openly . ” 
 
  Elizabeth coloured and laughed as Elizabeth replied , “ Yes , Fitzwilliam know enough of Elizabeth frankness to believe Elizabeth capable of that . After abusing Elizabeth so abominably to Elizabeth face , Elizabeth could have no scruple in abusing Elizabeth to all Elizabeth relations . ” 
 
  “ What did Elizabeth say of Elizabeth , that Elizabeth did not deserve ? For , though Elizabeth accusations were ill - founded , formed on mistaken premises , Elizabeth behaviour to Elizabeth at the time had merited the severest reproof . Elizabeth behaviour to Elizabeth at the time was unpardonable . Elizabeth can not think of Elizabeth behaviour to Elizabeth at the time without abhorrence . ” 
 
  “ We will not quarrel for the greater share of blame annexed to that evening , ” said Elizabeth . “ The conduct of neither , if strictly examined , will be irreproachable ; but since then , we have both , Elizabeth hope , improved in civility . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth can not be so easily reconciled to Elizabeth . The recollection of what Elizabeth then said , of Elizabeth conduct , Elizabeth manners , Elizabeth expressions during the whole of it , is now , and has been many months , inexpressibly painful to Elizabeth . Elizabeth reproof , so well applied , Elizabeth shall never forget : ‘ had Elizabeth behaved in a more gentlemanlike manner . ’ Those were Elizabeth words . Fitzwilliam know not , Fitzwilliam can scarcely conceive , how Elizabeth words have tortured me;—though it was some time , Elizabeth confess , before Elizabeth was reasonable enough to allow Elizabeth words justice . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth was certainly very far from expecting Elizabeth words to make so strong an impression . Elizabeth had not the smallest idea of Elizabeth words being ever felt in such a way . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam can easily believe it . Elizabeth thought Elizabeth then devoid of every proper feeling , Fitzwilliam am sure Elizabeth did . The turn of Elizabeth countenance Elizabeth shall never forget , as Elizabeth said that Elizabeth could not have addressed Elizabeth in any possible way that would induce Elizabeth to accept Elizabeth . ” 
 
  “ Oh ! do not repeat what Elizabeth then said . These recollections will not do at all . Elizabeth assure Fitzwilliam that Elizabeth have long been most heartily ashamed of These recollections . ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam mentioned Fitzwilliam letter . “ Did Fitzwilliam letter , ” said Fitzwilliam , “ did Fitzwilliam letter soon make Elizabeth think better of Fitzwilliam ? Did Elizabeth , on reading Fitzwilliam letter , give any credit to Fitzwilliam letter contents ? ” 
 
  Elizabeth explained what Fitzwilliam letter effect on Elizabeth had been , and how gradually all Elizabeth former prejudices had been removed . 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam knew , ” said Fitzwilliam , “ that what Fitzwilliam wrote must give Elizabeth pain , but Fitzwilliam letter was necessary . Fitzwilliam hope Elizabeth have destroyed Fitzwilliam letter . There was one part especially , the opening of Fitzwilliam letter , which Fitzwilliam should dread Elizabeth having the power of reading again . Fitzwilliam can remember some expressions which might justly make Elizabeth hate Fitzwilliam . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam letter shall certainly be burnt , if Elizabeth believe Fitzwilliam letter essential to the preservation of Fitzwilliam regard ; but , though we have both reason to think Fitzwilliam opinions not entirely unalterable , Fitzwilliam opinions are not , Fitzwilliam hope , quite so easily changed as are implies . ” 
 
  “ When Fitzwilliam wrote Fitzwilliam letter , ” replied Fitzwilliam , “ Fitzwilliam believed Fitzwilliam perfectly calm and cool , but Fitzwilliam am since convinced that Fitzwilliam letter was written in a dreadful bitterness of spirit . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam letter , perhaps , began in bitterness , but Fitzwilliam letter did not end so . The adieu is charity itself . But think no more of Fitzwilliam letter . The feelings of the person who wrote , and the person who received Fitzwilliam letter , are now so widely different from what The feelings of the person who wrote , and the person who received Fitzwilliam letter were then , that every unpleasant circumstance attending Fitzwilliam letter ought to be forgotten . Elizabeth must learn some of Fitzwilliam philosophy . Think only of the past as the past remembrance gives Elizabeth pleasure . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam can not give Elizabeth credit for any philosophy of the kind . Elizabeth retrospections must be so totally void of reproach , that the contentment arising from Elizabeth retrospections is not of philosophy , but , what is much better , of innocence . But with Fitzwilliam , it is not so . Painful recollections will intrude which can not , which ought not , to be repelled . Fitzwilliam have been a selfish being all Fitzwilliam life , in practice , though not in principle . As a child Fitzwilliam was taught what was right , but Fitzwilliam was not taught to correct Fitzwilliam temper . Fitzwilliam was given good principles , but left to follow good principles in pride and conceit . Unfortunately an only son ( for many years an only child ) , Fitzwilliam was spoilt by Fitzwilliam parents , who , though good Fitzwilliam parents , who , though good ( Fitzwilliam father , particularly , all that was benevolent and amiable ) , allowed , encouraged , almost taught Fitzwilliam to be selfish and overbearing ; to care for none beyond Fitzwilliam own family circle ; to think meanly of all the rest of the world ; to wish at least to think meanly of all the rest of the world sense and worth compared with Fitzwilliam own . Such Fitzwilliam was , from eight to eight and twenty ; and such Fitzwilliam might still have been but for Elizabeth , dearest , loveliest Elizabeth ! What do Fitzwilliam not owe Elizabeth ! Elizabeth taught Fitzwilliam a lesson , hard indeed at first , but most advantageous . By Elizabeth , Fitzwilliam was properly humbled . Fitzwilliam came to Elizabeth without a doubt of Fitzwilliam reception . Elizabeth showed Fitzwilliam how insufficient were all Fitzwilliam pretensions to please a woman worthy of being pleased . ” 
 
  “ Had Elizabeth then persuaded Elizabeth that Elizabeth should ? ” 
 
  “ Indeed Elizabeth had . What will Elizabeth think of Elizabeth vanity ? Elizabeth believed Elizabeth to be wishing , expecting Elizabeth addresses . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth manners must have been in fault , but not intentionally , Elizabeth assure Elizabeth . Elizabeth never meant to deceive Elizabeth , but Elizabeth spirits might often lead Elizabeth wrong . How Elizabeth must have hated Fitzwilliam after that evening ? ” 
 
  “ Hate Fitzwilliam ! Elizabeth was angry perhaps at first , but Elizabeth anger soon began to take a proper direction . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth am almost afraid of asking what Elizabeth thought of Elizabeth , when They met at Pemberley . Elizabeth blamed Elizabeth for coming ? ” 
 
  “ No indeed ; Elizabeth felt nothing but surprise . ” 
 
  “ Elizabeth surprise could not be greater than Elizabeth in being noticed by Elizabeth . Elizabeth conscience told Elizabeth that Elizabeth deserved no extraordinary politeness , and Elizabeth confess that Elizabeth did not expect to receive more than Elizabeth due . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam object then , ” replied Fitzwilliam , “ was to show Elizabeth , by every civility in Fitzwilliam power , that Fitzwilliam was not so mean as to resent the past ; and Fitzwilliam hoped to obtain Elizabeth forgiveness , to lessen Elizabeth ill opinion , by letting Elizabeth see that Elizabeth reproofs had been attended to . How soon any other wishes introduced any other wishes Fitzwilliam can hardly tell , but Fitzwilliam believe in about half an hour after Fitzwilliam had seen Elizabeth . ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam then told Elizabeth of Georgiana ’s delight in Georgiana ’s acquaintance , and of Georgiana ’s disappointment at Georgiana ’s acquaintance sudden interruption ; which naturally leading to the cause of Georgiana ’s acquaintance sudden interruption , Georgiana ’s soon learnt that Fitzwilliam resolution of following Georgiana ’s from Derbyshire in quest of Georgiana ’s sister had been formed before Fitzwilliam quitted the inn , and that Fitzwilliam gravity and thoughtfulness there had arisen from no other struggles than what such a purpose must comprehend . 
 
  Elizabeth expressed Elizabeth gratitude again , but it was too painful a subject to each , to be dwelt on farther . 
 
  After walking several miles in a leisurely manner , and too busy to know anything about it , they found at last , on examining They watches , that it was time to be at home . 
 
  “ What could become of Charles and Jane ! ” was a wonder which introduced the discussion of Charles and Jane affairs . Fitzwilliam was delighted with Charles and Jane engagement ; Fitzwilliam friend had given Fitzwilliam the earliest information of Charles and Jane engagement . 
 
  “ Elizabeth must ask whether Fitzwilliam were surprised ? ” said Elizabeth . 
 
  “ Not at all . When Fitzwilliam went away , Fitzwilliam felt that Charles and Jane engagement would soon happen . ” 
 
  “ That is to say , Fitzwilliam had given Fitzwilliam permission . Elizabeth guessed as much . ” And though Fitzwilliam exclaimed at the term , Elizabeth found that it had been pretty much the case . 
 
  “ On the evening before Fitzwilliam going to London , ” said Fitzwilliam , “ Fitzwilliam made a confession to Charles , which Fitzwilliam believe Fitzwilliam ought to have made long ago . Fitzwilliam told Charles of all that had occurred to make Fitzwilliam former interference in Charles affairs absurd and impertinent . Charles surprise was great . Charles had never had the slightest suspicion . Fitzwilliam told Charles , moreover , that Fitzwilliam believed Fitzwilliam mistaken in supposing , as Fitzwilliam had done , that Jane was indifferent to Charles ; and as Fitzwilliam could easily perceive that Charles attachment to Jane was unabated , Fitzwilliam felt no doubt of Charles and Jane happiness together . ” 
 
  Elizabeth could not help smiling at Fitzwilliam easy manner of directing Elizabeth . 
 
  “ Did Fitzwilliam speak from Fitzwilliam own observation , ” said Elizabeth , “ when Fitzwilliam told Charles that Elizabeth sister loved Charles , or merely from Elizabeth information last spring ? ” 
 
  “ From the former . Fitzwilliam had narrowly observed Jane during the two visits which Fitzwilliam had lately made here ; and Fitzwilliam was convinced of Jane affection . ” 
 
  “ And Fitzwilliam assurance of Jane affection , Elizabeth suppose , carried immediate conviction to Charles . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam assurance of Jane affection did . Charles is most unaffectedly modest . Charles diffidence had prevented Charles depending on Charles own judgment in so anxious a case , but Charles reliance on Fitzwilliam made every thing easy . Fitzwilliam was obliged to confess one thing , which for a time , and not unjustly , offended Charles . Fitzwilliam could not allow Fitzwilliam to conceal that Elizabeth sister had been in town three months last winter , that Fitzwilliam had known been , and purposely kept been from Charles . Charles was angry . But Charles anger , Fitzwilliam am persuaded , lasted no longer than Charles remained in any doubt of Elizabeth sister ’s sentiments . Charles has heartily forgiven Fitzwilliam now . ” 
 
  Elizabeth longed to observe that Charles had been a most delightful friend ; so easily guided that Charles worth was invaluable ; but Elizabeth checked Elizabeth . Elizabeth remembered that Charles had yet to learn to be laughed at , and it was rather too early to begin . In anticipating the happiness of Charles , which of course was to be inferior only to Fitzwilliam own , Fitzwilliam continued the conversation till they reached the house . In the hall they parted . 
 Chapter 
 
  “ Jane dear Elizabeth , where can Jane dear Elizabeth have been walking to ? ” was a question which Jane dear Elizabeth received from Jane as soon as Jane dear Elizabeth entered their room , and from all the others when their sat down to table . Jane dear Elizabeth had only to say in reply , that their had wandered about , till Jane dear Elizabeth was beyond Jane dear Elizabeth own knowledge . Jane dear Elizabeth coloured as Jane dear Elizabeth spoke ; but neither coloured , nor anything else , awakened a suspicion of the truth . 
 
  The evening passed quietly , unmarked by anything extraordinary . The acknowledged lovers talked and laughed , the unacknowledged were silent . Fitzwilliam was not of a disposition in which happiness overflows in mirth ; and Jane dear Elizabeth , agitated and confused , rather knew that Jane dear Elizabeth was happy than felt Jane dear Elizabeth to be so ; for , besides the immediate embarrassment , there were other evils before Jane dear Elizabeth . Jane dear Elizabeth anticipated what would be felt in the family when Jane dear Elizabeth situation became known ; Jane dear Elizabeth was aware that no one liked Fitzwilliam but Jane ; and even feared that with the others it was a dislike which not all Fitzwilliam fortune and consequence might do away . 
 
  At night Jane dear Elizabeth opened Jane dear Elizabeth heart to Jane . Though suspicion was very far from Miss Bennet ’s general habits , Miss Bennet ’s was absolutely incredulous here . 
 
  “ Jane dear Elizabeth are joking , Jane dear Elizabeth . This can not be!—engaged to Fitzwilliam ! No , no , Jane dear Elizabeth shall not deceive Miss Bennet ’s . Miss Bennet ’s know This to be impossible . ” 
 
  “ This is a wretched beginning indeed ! Jane dear Elizabeth sole dependence was on Jane ; and Jane dear Elizabeth am sure nobody else will believe Jane dear Elizabeth , if Jane do not . Yet , indeed , Jane dear Elizabeth am in earnest . Jane dear Elizabeth speak nothing but the truth . Fitzwilliam still loves Jane dear Elizabeth , and their are engaged . ” 
 
  Jane looked at Jane dear Elizabeth doubtingly . “ Oh , Jane dear Elizabeth ! it can not be . Miss Bennet ’s know how much Jane dear Elizabeth dislike Fitzwilliam . ” 
 
  “ Miss Bennet ’s know nothing of the matter . That is all to be forgot . Perhaps Jane dear Elizabeth did not always love Fitzwilliam so well as Jane dear Elizabeth do now . But in such cases as these , a good memory is unpardonable . This is the last time Jane dear Elizabeth shall ever remember it Jane dear Elizabeth . ” Miss Bennet ’s Miss Bennet ’s still looked all amazement . Jane dear Elizabeth again , and more seriously assured Miss Bennet ’s of its truth . 
 
  “ Good Heaven ! can it be really so ! Yet now Jane must believe Jane dear Elizabeth , ” cried Jane . “ Jane dear Elizabeth , Miss Bennet ’s would — Miss Bennet ’s do congratulate Jane dear Elizabeth — but are Jane dear Elizabeth certain ? forgive the question — are Jane dear Elizabeth quite certain that Jane dear Elizabeth can be happy with Fitzwilliam ? ” 
 
  “ There can be no doubt of be . It is settled between their already , that their are to be the happiest couple in the world . But are Jane pleased , Jane ? Shall Jane like to have such a brother ? ” 
 
  “ Very , very much . Nothing could give either Fitzwilliam or Jane more delight . But we considered it , we talked of it as impossible . And do Jane dear Elizabeth really love Fitzwilliam quite well enough ? Oh , Jane dear Elizabeth ! do anything rather than marry without affection . Are Jane dear Elizabeth quite sure that Jane dear Elizabeth feel what Jane dear Elizabeth ought to do ? ” 
 
  “ Oh , yes ! Miss Bennet ’s will only think Jane dear Elizabeth feel more than Jane dear Elizabeth ought to do , when Jane dear Elizabeth tell Miss Bennet ’s all . ” 
 
  “ What do Jane dear Elizabeth mean ? ” 
 
  “ Why , Jane dear Elizabeth must confess that Jane dear Elizabeth love Fitzwilliam better than Jane dear Elizabeth do Fitzwilliam . Jane dear Elizabeth am afraid Miss Bennet ’s will be angry . ” 
 
  “ Miss Bennet ’s dearest sister , now be serious . Miss Bennet ’s want to talk very seriously . Let Miss Bennet ’s know every thing that Miss Bennet ’s am to know , without delay . Will Jane dear Elizabeth tell Miss Bennet ’s how long Jane dear Elizabeth have loved Fitzwilliam ? ” 
 
  “ loved has been coming on so gradually , that Jane dear Elizabeth hardly know when loved began . But Jane dear Elizabeth believe Jane dear Elizabeth must date loved from Jane dear Elizabeth first seeing Fitzwilliam beautiful grounds at Pemberley . ” 
 
  Another entreaty that Jane dear Elizabeth would be serious , however , produced the desired effect ; and Jane dear Elizabeth soon satisfied Jane by Jane dear Elizabeth solemn assurances of attachment . When convinced on that article , Miss Bennet ’s had nothing further to wish . 
 
  “ Now Miss Bennet ’s am quite happy , ” said Miss Bennet ’s , “ for Jane dear Elizabeth will be as happy as Miss Bennet ’s . Miss Bennet ’s always had a value for Fitzwilliam . Were it for nothing but Fitzwilliam love of Jane dear Elizabeth , Miss Bennet ’s must always have esteemed Fitzwilliam ; but now , as Fitzwilliam friend and Jane dear Elizabeth husband , there can be only Charles and Jane dear Elizabeth more dear to Miss Bennet ’s . But Jane dear Elizabeth , Jane dear Elizabeth have been very sly , very reserved with Miss Bennet ’s . How little did Jane dear Elizabeth tell Miss Bennet ’s of what passed at Pemberley and Lambton ! Miss Bennet ’s owe all that Miss Bennet ’s know of it to another , not to Jane dear Elizabeth . ” 
 
  Jane dear Elizabeth told Miss Bennet ’s the motives of Jane dear Elizabeth secrecy . Jane dear Elizabeth had been unwilling to mention Fitzwilliam ; and the unsettled state of Jane dear Elizabeth own feelings had made Jane dear Elizabeth equally avoid the name of Fitzwilliam friend . But now Jane dear Elizabeth would no longer conceal from Miss Bennet ’s Fitzwilliam share in Lydia ’s marriage . All was acknowledged , and half the night spent in conversation . 
 
  “ Good gracious ! ” cried Miss Bennet ’s , as Miss Bennet ’s stood at a window the next morning , “ if that disagreeable Fitzwilliam is not coming here again with Fitzwilliam ! What can Fitzwilliam mean by being so tiresome as to be always coming here ? Miss Bennet ’s had no notion but Fitzwilliam would go a - shooting , or something or other , and not disturb our with Fitzwilliam company . What shall our do with Fitzwilliam ? Jane dear Elizabeth , Jane dear Elizabeth must walk out with Fitzwilliam again , that Fitzwilliam may not be in Fitzwilliam way . ” 
 
  Jane dear Elizabeth could hardly help laughing at so convenient a proposal ; yet was really vexed that Jane dear Elizabeth mother should be always giving Fitzwilliam such an epithet . 
 
  As soon as they entered , Fitzwilliam looked at Jane dear Elizabeth so expressively , and shook hands with such warmth , as left no doubt of Fitzwilliam good information ; and Fitzwilliam soon afterwards said aloud , “ Miss Bennet ’s , have Miss Bennet ’s no more lanes hereabouts in which Jane dear Elizabeth may lose Jane dear Elizabeth way again to - day ? ” 
 
  “ Miss Bennet ’s advise Fitzwilliam , and Jane dear Elizabeth , and Kitty , ” said Miss Bennet ’s , “ to walk to Oakham Mount this morning . walk is a nice long walk , and Fitzwilliam has never seen the view . ” 
 
  “ walk may do very well for Fitzwilliam , and Jane dear Elizabeth , and Kitty , ” replied Fitzwilliam ; “ but Fitzwilliam am sure walk will be too much for Kitty . Wo n’t it , Kitty ? ” Kitty owned that Kitty had rather stay at home . Fitzwilliam professed a great curiosity to see the view from Oakham Mount , and Jane dear Elizabeth silently consented . As Jane dear Elizabeth went up stairs to get ready , Miss Bennet ’s followed Jane dear Elizabeth , saying : 
 
  “ Miss Bennet ’s am quite sorry , Jane dear Elizabeth , that Jane dear Elizabeth should be forced to have Fitzwilliam all to Jane dear Elizabeth . But Miss Bennet ’s hope Jane dear Elizabeth will not mind have : it is all for Jane ’s sake , Jane dear Elizabeth know ; and there is no occasion for talking to Fitzwilliam , except just now and then . So , do not put Jane dear Elizabeth to inconvenience . ” 
 
  During their walk , it was resolved that Father ’s consent should be asked in the course of the evening . Jane dear Elizabeth reserved to Jane dear Elizabeth the application for Miss Bennet ’s . Jane dear Elizabeth could not determine how Miss Bennet ’s would take the application for Miss Bennet ’s ; sometimes doubting whether all Fitzwilliam wealth and grandeur would be enough to overcome Miss Bennet ’s abhorrence of Fitzwilliam . But whether Jane dear Elizabeth were violently set against the match , or violently delighted with the match , it was certain that Jane dear Elizabeth manner would be equally ill adapted to do credit to Jane dear Elizabeth sense ; and Jane dear Elizabeth could no more bear that Fitzwilliam should hear the first raptures of Jane dear Elizabeth joy , than the first vehemence of Jane dear Elizabeth disapprobation . 
 
  In the evening , soon after Father ’s withdrew to the library , Jane dear Elizabeth saw Fitzwilliam rise also and follow Father ’s , and Jane dear Elizabeth agitation on seeing it was extreme . Jane dear Elizabeth did not fear Jane dear Elizabeth father ’s opposition , but Father ’s was going to be made unhappy ; and that it should be through Jane dear Elizabeth means — that Jane dear Elizabeth , should be distressing Father ’s by Jane dear Elizabeth choice , should be filling Father ’s with fears and regrets in disposing of Jane dear Elizabeth — was a wretched reflection , and Jane dear Elizabeth sat in misery till Fitzwilliam appeared again , when , looking at Fitzwilliam , Jane dear Elizabeth was a little relieved by Fitzwilliam smile . In a few minutes Fitzwilliam approached the table where Jane dear Elizabeth was sitting with Kitty ; and , while pretending to admire Jane dear Elizabeth work said in a whisper , “ Go to Father ’s , Father ’s wants Jane dear Elizabeth in the library . ” Jane dear Elizabeth was gone directly . 
 
  Father ’s was walking about the room , looking grave and anxious . “ Jane dear Elizabeth , ” said Father ’s , “ what are Jane dear Elizabeth doing ? Are Jane dear Elizabeth out of Jane dear Elizabeth senses , to be accepting Fitzwilliam ? Have not Jane dear Elizabeth always hated Fitzwilliam ? ” 
 
  How earnestly did Jane dear Elizabeth then wish that Jane dear Elizabeth former opinions had been more reasonable , Jane dear Elizabeth expressions more moderate ! It would have spared Jane dear Elizabeth from explanations and professions which it was exceedingly awkward to give ; but explanations and professions which it was exceedingly awkward to give were now necessary , and Jane dear Elizabeth assured Father ’s , with some confusion , of Jane dear Elizabeth attachment to Fitzwilliam . 
 
  “ Or , in other words , Jane dear Elizabeth are determined to have Fitzwilliam . Fitzwilliam is rich , to be sure , and Jane dear Elizabeth may have more fine clothes and fine carriages than Jane . But will more fine clothes and fine carriages make Jane dear Elizabeth happy ? ” 
 
  “ Have Father ’s any other objection , ” said Jane dear Elizabeth , “ than Father ’s belief of Jane dear Elizabeth indifference ? ” 
 
  “ None at all . We all know Fitzwilliam to be a proud , unpleasant sort of man ; but this would be nothing if Jane dear Elizabeth really liked Fitzwilliam . ” 
 
  “ Jane dear Elizabeth do , Jane dear Elizabeth do like Fitzwilliam , ” Jane dear Elizabeth replied , with tears in Jane dear Elizabeth eyes , “ Jane dear Elizabeth love Fitzwilliam . Indeed Fitzwilliam has no improper pride . Fitzwilliam is perfectly amiable . Father ’s do not know what Fitzwilliam really is ; then pray do not pain Jane dear Elizabeth by speaking of Fitzwilliam in such terms . ” 
 
  “ Jane dear Elizabeth , ” said Jane dear Elizabeth father , “ Father ’s have given Fitzwilliam Father ’s consent . Fitzwilliam is the kind of man , indeed , to whom Father ’s should never dare refuse anything , which Fitzwilliam condescended to ask . Father ’s now give it to Jane dear Elizabeth , if Jane dear Elizabeth are resolved on having Fitzwilliam . But let Father ’s advise Jane dear Elizabeth to think better of it . Father ’s know Jane dear Elizabeth disposition , Jane dear Elizabeth . Father ’s know that Jane dear Elizabeth could be neither happy nor respectable , unless Jane dear Elizabeth truly esteemed Fitzwilliam ; unless Jane dear Elizabeth looked up to Fitzwilliam as a superior . Jane dear Elizabeth lively talents would place Jane dear Elizabeth in the greatest danger in an unequal marriage . Jane dear Elizabeth could scarcely escape discredit and misery . Jane dear Elizabeth , let Father ’s not have the grief of seeing Jane dear Elizabeth unable to respect Jane dear Elizabeth partner in life . Jane dear Elizabeth know not what Jane dear Elizabeth are about . ” 
 
  Jane dear Elizabeth , was earnest and solemn in Jane dear Elizabeth reply ; and at length , by repeated assurances that Fitzwilliam was really the object of Jane dear Elizabeth choice , by explaining the gradual change which Jane dear Elizabeth estimation of Fitzwilliam had undergone , relating Jane dear Elizabeth absolute certainty that Fitzwilliam affection was not the work of a day , but had stood the test of many months ’ suspense , and enumerating with energy all Fitzwilliam good qualities , Jane dear Elizabeth did conquer Jane dear Elizabeth father ’s incredulity , and reconcile Father ’s to the match . 
 
  “ Well , Father ’s dear , ” said Father ’s , when Jane dear Elizabeth ceased speaking , “ Father ’s have no more to say . If this be the case , Fitzwilliam deserves Jane dear Elizabeth . Father ’s could not have parted with Jane dear Elizabeth , Father ’s Elizabeth , to anyone less worthy . ” 
 
  To complete the favourable impression , Jane dear Elizabeth then told Father ’s what Fitzwilliam had voluntarily done for Lydia ’s . Father ’s heard Jane dear Elizabeth with astonishment . 
 
  “ This is an evening of wonders , indeed ! And so , Fitzwilliam did every thing ; made up the match , gave the money , paid Fitzwilliam debts , and got Fitzwilliam Fitzwilliam commission ! So much the better . It will save Father ’s a world of trouble and economy . Had it been Jane dear Elizabeth uncle ’s doing , Father ’s must and would have paid Jane dear Elizabeth uncle ’s ; but these violent young lovers carry every thing these violent young lovers own way . Father ’s shall offer to pay Fitzwilliam to - morrow ; Fitzwilliam will rant and storm about Fitzwilliam love for Jane dear Elizabeth , and there will be an end of the matter . ” 
 
  Father ’s then recollected Jane dear Elizabeth embarrassment a few days before , on Father ’s reading William Collins ’s letter ; and after laughing at Jane dear Elizabeth some time , allowed Jane dear Elizabeth at last to go — saying , as Miss Bennet ’s quitted the room , “ If any young men come for Mary or Kitty , send any young men in , for Miss Bennet ’s am quite at leisure . ” 
 
  Jane dear Elizabeth mind was now relieved from a very heavy weight ; and , after half an hour ’s quiet reflection in Jane dear Elizabeth own room , Jane dear Elizabeth was able to join the others with tolerable composure . Every thing was too recent for gaiety , but the evening passed tranquilly away ; there was no longer anything material to be dreaded , and the comfort of ease and familiarity would come in time . 
 
  When Miss Bennet ’s went up to Miss Bennet ’s dressing - room at night , Jane dear Elizabeth followed Miss Bennet ’s , and made the important communication . the important communication effect was most extraordinary ; for on first hearing the important communication , Miss Bennet ’s sat quite still , and unable to utter a syllable . Nor was it under many , many minutes that Miss Bennet ’s could comprehend what Miss Bennet ’s heard ; though not in general backward to credit what was for the advantage of Miss Bennet ’s family , or that came in the shape of a lover to any of the family . Miss Bennet ’s began at length to recover , to fidget about in Miss Bennet ’s chair , get up , sit down again , wonder , and bless Miss Bennet ’s . 
 
  “ Good gracious ! Father ’s bless Miss Bennet ’s ! only think ! dear Miss Bennet ’s ! Fitzwilliam ! Who would have thought it ! And is it really true ? Oh ! Miss Bennet ’s sweetest Elizabeth ! how rich and how great Jane dear Elizabeth will be ! What pin - money , what jewels , what carriages Jane dear Elizabeth will have ! Jane ’s is nothing to it — nothing at all . Miss Bennet ’s am so pleased — so happy . Such a charming man!—so handsome ! so tall!—Oh , Miss Bennet ’s dear Elizabeth ! pray apologise for Miss Bennet ’s having disliked Fitzwilliam so much before . Miss Bennet ’s hope Fitzwilliam will overlook disliked . Jane dear Elizabeth A house in town ! Every thing that is charming ! Three daughters married ! Ten thousand a year ! Oh , Lord ! What will become of Jane dear Elizabeth . Jane dear Elizabeth shall go distracted . ” 
 
  This was enough to prove that Miss Bennet ’s approbation need not be doubted : and Jane dear Elizabeth , rejoicing that such an effusion was heard only by Jane dear Elizabeth , soon went away . But before Jane dear Elizabeth had been three minutes in Jane dear Elizabeth own room , Jane dear Elizabeth mother followed Jane dear Elizabeth . 
 
  “ Jane dear Elizabeth , ” Miss Bennet ’s cried , “ Miss Bennet ’s can think of nothing else ! Ten thousand a year , and very likely more ! ’ Tis as good as a Lord ! And a special licence . Jane dear Elizabeth must and shall be married by a special licence . But Miss Bennet ’s dearest love , tell Miss Bennet ’s what dish Fitzwilliam is particularly fond of , that Miss Bennet ’s may have it to - morrow . ” 
 
  This was a sad omen of what Miss Bennet ’s behaviour to Fitzwilliam might be ; and Jane dear Elizabeth found that , though in the certain possession of Fitzwilliam warmest affection , and secure of Jane dear Elizabeth relations ’ consent , there was still something to be wished for . But the morrow passed off much better than Jane dear Elizabeth expected ; for Miss Bennet ’s luckily stood in such awe of Fitzwilliam that Miss Bennet ’s ventured not to speak to Fitzwilliam , unless it was in Miss Bennet ’s power to offer Fitzwilliam any attention , or mark Miss Bennet ’s deference for Fitzwilliam opinion . 
 
  Jane dear Elizabeth had the satisfaction of seeing Jane dear Elizabeth father taking pains to get acquainted with Fitzwilliam ; and Father ’s soon assured Jane dear Elizabeth that Father ’s was rising every hour in Father ’s esteem . 
 
  “ Father ’s admire all Father ’s three sons - in - law highly , ” said Father ’s . “ Fitzwilliam , perhaps , is Father ’s favourite ; but Father ’s think Father ’s shall like Jane dear Elizabeth husband quite as well as Jane ’s . ” 
 Chapter 
 
  Elizabeth ’s spirits soon rising to playfulness again , Elizabeth ’s wanted Fitzwilliam to account for Fitzwilliam having ever fallen in love with Elizabeth ’s . “ How could Fitzwilliam begin ? ” said Elizabeth ’s . “ Elizabeth ’s can comprehend Fitzwilliam going on charmingly , when Fitzwilliam had once made a beginning ; but what could set Fitzwilliam off in the first place ? ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam can not fix on the hour , or the spot , or the look , or the words , which laid the foundation . It is too long ago . Fitzwilliam was in the middle before Fitzwilliam knew that Fitzwilliam had begun . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam beauty Fitzwilliam had early withstood , and as for Fitzwilliam manners — Fitzwilliam behaviour to Fitzwilliam was at least always bordering on the uncivil , and Fitzwilliam never spoke to Fitzwilliam without rather wishing to give Fitzwilliam pain than not . Now be sincere ; did Fitzwilliam admire Fitzwilliam for Fitzwilliam impertinence ? ” 
 
  “ For the liveliness of Elizabeth ’s mind , Fitzwilliam did . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam may as well call Fitzwilliam impertinence impertinence at once . Fitzwilliam impertinence was very little less . The fact is , that Fitzwilliam were sick of civility , of deference , of officious attention . Fitzwilliam were disgusted with the women who were always speaking , and looking , and thinking for Fitzwilliam approbation alone . Fitzwilliam roused , and interested Fitzwilliam , because Fitzwilliam was so unlike the women who were always speaking , and looking , and thinking for Fitzwilliam approbation alone . Had Fitzwilliam not been really amiable , Fitzwilliam would have hated Fitzwilliam for it ; but in spite of the pains Fitzwilliam took to disguise Fitzwilliam , Fitzwilliam feelings were always noble and just ; and in Fitzwilliam heart , Fitzwilliam thoroughly despised the persons who so assiduously courted Fitzwilliam . There — Fitzwilliam have saved Fitzwilliam the trouble of accounting for it ; and really , all things considered , Fitzwilliam begin to think it perfectly reasonable . To be sure , Fitzwilliam knew no actual good of Fitzwilliam — but nobody thinks of that when nobody fall in love . ” 
 
  “ Was there no good in Fitzwilliam affectionate behaviour to Jane while Jane was ill at Netherfield ? ” 
 
  “ Dearest Jane ! who could have done less for Jane ? But make a virtue of it by all means . Fitzwilliam good qualities are under Fitzwilliam protection , and Fitzwilliam are to exaggerate Fitzwilliam good qualities as much as possible ; and , in return , it belongs to Fitzwilliam to find occasions for teasing and quarrelling with Fitzwilliam as often as may be ; and Fitzwilliam shall begin directly by asking Fitzwilliam what made Fitzwilliam so unwilling to come to the point at last . What made Fitzwilliam so shy of Fitzwilliam , when Fitzwilliam first called , and afterwards dined here ? Why , especially , when Fitzwilliam called , did Fitzwilliam look as if Fitzwilliam did not care about Fitzwilliam ? ” 
 
  “ Because Fitzwilliam were grave and silent , and gave Fitzwilliam no encouragement . ” 
 
  “ But Fitzwilliam was embarrassed . ” 
 
  “ And so was I. ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam might have talked to Fitzwilliam more when Fitzwilliam came to dinner . ” 
 
  “ A man who had felt less , might . ” 
 
  “ How unlucky that Fitzwilliam should have a reasonable answer to give , and that Fitzwilliam should be so reasonable as to admit it ! But Fitzwilliam wonder how long Fitzwilliam would have gone on , if Fitzwilliam had been left to Fitzwilliam . Fitzwilliam wonder when Fitzwilliam would have spoken , if Fitzwilliam had not asked Fitzwilliam ! Fitzwilliam resolution of thanking Fitzwilliam for Fitzwilliam kindness to Lydia had certainly great effect . Too much , Fitzwilliam am afraid ; for what becomes of the moral , if our comfort springs from a breach of promise ? for Fitzwilliam ought not to have mentioned the subject . mentioned will never do . ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam need not distress Fitzwilliam . The moral will be perfectly fair . Cathleen ’s unjustifiable endeavours to separate us were the means of removing all Fitzwilliam doubts . Fitzwilliam am not indebted for Fitzwilliam present happiness to Fitzwilliam eager desire of expressing Fitzwilliam gratitude . Fitzwilliam was not in a humour to wait for any opening of Fitzwilliam . Fitzwilliam aunt ’s intelligence had given Fitzwilliam hope , and Fitzwilliam was determined at once to know every thing . ” 
 
  “ Cathleen ’s has been of infinite use , which ought to make Cathleen ’s happy , for Cathleen ’s loves to be of use . But tell Elizabeth ’s , what did Fitzwilliam come down to Netherfield for ? Was it merely to ride to Longbourn and be embarrassed ? or had Fitzwilliam intended any more serious consequence ? ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam real purpose was to see Fitzwilliam , and to judge , if Fitzwilliam could , whether Fitzwilliam might ever hope to make Fitzwilliam love Fitzwilliam . Fitzwilliam avowed one , or what Fitzwilliam avowed to Fitzwilliam , was to see whether Cathleen ’s were still partial to Charles , and if Cathleen ’s were , to make the confession to Charles which Fitzwilliam have since made . ” 
 
  “ Shall Fitzwilliam ever have courage to announce to Cathleen ’s what is to befall Cathleen ’s ? ” 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam am more likely to want time than courage , Fitzwilliam . But it ought to be done , and if Fitzwilliam will give Fitzwilliam a sheet of paper , it shall be done directly . ” 
 
  “ And if Fitzwilliam had not a letter to write Fitzwilliam , Fitzwilliam might sit by Fitzwilliam and admire the evenness of Fitzwilliam writing , as another young lady once did . But Fitzwilliam have an aunt , too , who must not be longer neglected . ” 
 
  From an unwillingness to confess how much Elizabeth ’s intimacy with Fitzwilliam had been over - rated , Elizabeth ’s had never yet answered Madeline ’s long letter ; but now , having that to communicate which Elizabeth ’s knew would be most welcome , Elizabeth ’s was almost ashamed to find that Elizabeth ’s uncle and aunt had already lost three days of happiness , and immediately wrote as follows : 
 
  “ Elizabeth ’s would have thanked Fitzwilliam before , Fitzwilliam , as Elizabeth ’s ought to have done , for Fitzwilliam long , kind , satisfactory , detail of particulars ; but to say the truth , Elizabeth ’s was too cross to write . Fitzwilliam supposed more than really existed . But now suppose as much as Fitzwilliam choose ; give a loose rein to Fitzwilliam fancy , indulge Fitzwilliam imagination in every possible flight which the subject will afford , and unless Fitzwilliam believe Elizabeth ’s actually married , Fitzwilliam can not greatly err . Fitzwilliam must write again very soon , and praise Fitzwilliam a great deal more than Fitzwilliam did in Fitzwilliam last . Elizabeth ’s thank Fitzwilliam , again and again , for not going to the Lakes . How could Elizabeth ’s be so silly as to wish going ! Fitzwilliam idea of the ponies is delightful . We will go round the Park every day . Elizabeth ’s am the happiest creature in the world . Perhaps other people have said so before , but not one with such justice . Elizabeth ’s am happier even than Jane ; Jane only smiles , Elizabeth ’s laugh . Fitzwilliam sends Fitzwilliam all the love in the world that Fitzwilliam can spare from Elizabeth ’s . Fitzwilliam are all to come to Pemberley at Christmas . Fitzwilliam , etc . ” 
 
  Fitzwilliam ’s letter to Cathleen ’s was in a different style ; and still different from either was what Father sent to William Collins , in reply to Father last . 
 
  “ Dear Sir,“I must trouble William Collins once more for congratulations . Elizabeth ’s will soon be the wife of Fitzwilliam . Console Cathleen ’s as well as William Collins can . But , if Fitzwilliam were William Collins , Fitzwilliam would stand by Fitzwilliam . Fitzwilliam has more to give . 
 
  “ Fitzwilliam sincerely , etc . ” 
 
  Caroline ’s congratulations to Caroline ’s brother , on Caroline ’s brother approaching marriage , were all that was affectionate and insincere . Caroline ’s wrote even to Jane on the occasion , to express Caroline ’s delight , and repeat all Caroline ’s former professions of regard . Jane was not deceived , but Jane was affected ; and though feeling no reliance on Caroline ’s , could not help writing Caroline ’s a much kinder answer than Jane knew was deserved . 
 
  The joy which Georgiana expressed on receiving similar information , was as sincere as Georgiana brother ’s in sending similar information . Four sides of paper were insufficient to contain all Georgiana delight , and all Georgiana earnest desire of being loved by Georgiana sister . 
 
  Before any answer could arrive from William Collins , or any congratulations to Elizabeth ’s from William Collins wife , the Longbourn family heard that the Collinses were come the Collinses to Lucas Lodge . The reason of come was soon evident . Cathleen ’s had been rendered so exceedingly angry by the contents of Cathleen ’s nephew ’s letter , that Charlotte , really rejoicing in Caroline ’s brother approaching marriage , was anxious to get away till the storm was blown over . At such a moment , the arrival of William Collins was a sincere pleasure to Elizabeth ’s , though in the course of their meetings Elizabeth ’s must sometimes think the pleasure dearly bought , when Elizabeth ’s saw Fitzwilliam exposed to all the parading and obsequious civility of Elizabeth ’s husband . Fitzwilliam bore it , however , with admirable calmness . Fitzwilliam could even listen to William Collins , when Fitzwilliam complimented William Collins on carrying away the brightest jewel of the country , and expressed Fitzwilliam hopes of their all meeting frequently at St. James ’s , with very decent composure . If Fitzwilliam did shrug Fitzwilliam shoulders , it was not till William Collins was out of sight . 
 
  Mrs. Phillips ’s vulgarity was another , and perhaps a greater , tax on William Collins forbearance ; and though Mrs. Phillips ’s , as well as Mrs. Phillips ’s sister , stood in too much awe of William Collins to speak with the familiarity which Charles ’s good humour encouraged , yet , whenever Mrs. Phillips ’s did speak , Mrs. Phillips ’s must be vulgar . Nor was Mrs. Phillips ’s respect for William Collins , though Mrs. Phillips ’s respect for William Collins made Mrs. Phillips ’s more quiet , at all likely to make Mrs. Phillips ’s more elegant . Elizabeth ’s did all Elizabeth ’s could to shield William Collins from the frequent notice of either , and was ever anxious to keep William Collins to Elizabeth ’s , and to those of Elizabeth ’s family with whom William Collins might converse without mortification ; and though the uncomfortable feelings arising from all this took from the season of courtship much of the season of courtship pleasure , all this added to the hope of the future ; and Elizabeth ’s looked forward with delight to the time when they should be removed from society so little pleasing to either , to all the comfort and elegance of they family party at Pemberley . 
 Chapter
 
  Happy for all Mother maternal feelings was the day on which Mother got rid of Mother two most deserving daughters . With what delighted pride Mother afterwards visited Jane , and talked of Elizabeth , may be guessed . I wish I could say , for the sake of Mother family , that the accomplishment of Mother earnest desire in the establishment of so many of Mother children produced so happy an effect as to make Mother a sensible , amiable , well - informed woman for the rest of Mother life ; though perhaps it was lucky for Mother husband , who might not have relished domestic felicity in so unusual a form , that Mother still was occasionally nervous and invariably silly . 
 
  Father missed Elizabeth exceedingly ; Father affection for Elizabeth drew Father oftener from home than anything else could do . Father delighted in going to Pemberley , especially when Father was least expected . 
 
  Charles and Jane remained at Netherfield only a twelvemonth . So near a vicinity to Jane mother and Meryton relations was not desirable even to Charles easy temper , or Jane affectionate heart . The darling wish of Charles sisters was then gratified ; Charles bought an estate in a neighbouring county to Derbyshire , and Jane and Elizabeth , in addition to every other source of happiness , were within thirty miles of each other . 
 
  Kitty , to Kitty very material advantage , spent the chief of Kitty time with Kitty two elder sisters . In society so superior to what Kitty had generally known , Kitty improvement was great . Kitty was not of so ungovernable a temper as Lydia ; and , removed from the influence of Lydia ’s example , Kitty became , by proper attention and management , less irritable , less ignorant , and less insipid . From the further disadvantage of Lydia ’s society Kitty was of course carefully kept , and though Lydia frequently invited Kitty to come and stay with Lydia , with the promise of balls and young men , Kitty father would never consent to Kitty going . 
 
  Mary was the only daughter who remained at home ; and Mary was necessarily drawn from the pursuit of accomplishments by Mother ’s being quite unable to sit alone . Mary was obliged to mix more with the world , but Mary could still moralize over every morning visit ; and as Mary was no longer mortified by comparisons between Mary sisters ’ beauty and Mary own , it was suspected by Mary father that Mary submitted to the change without much reluctance . 
 
  As for George and Lydia , George and Lydia characters suffered no revolution from the marriage of Kitty two elder sisters . George bore with philosophy the conviction that Elizabeth must now become acquainted with whatever of George ingratitude and falsehood had before been unknown to Elizabeth ; and in spite of every thing , was not wholly without hope that George might yet be prevailed on to make George fortune . The congratulatory letter which Elizabeth received from Lydia on Elizabeth marriage , explained to Elizabeth that , by Lydia at least , if not by Lydia , such a hope was cherished . The congratulatory letter which Elizabeth received from Lydia on Elizabeth marriage was to this effect : 
 
  “ Lydia dear Elizabeth , 
  “ Lydia wish Elizabeth joy . If Elizabeth love George half as well as Lydia do Lydia dear George , Elizabeth must be very happy . It is a great comfort to have Elizabeth so rich , and when Elizabeth have nothing else to do , Lydia hope Elizabeth will think of us . Lydia am sure George would like a place at court very much , and Lydia do not think us shall have quite money enough to live upon without some help . Any place would do , of about three or four hundred a year ; but however , do not speak to George about it , if Elizabeth had rather not . 
 
  “ Elizabeth , etc . ” 
 
  As it happened that Elizabeth had much rather not , Elizabeth endeavoured in Elizabeth answer to put an end to every entreaty and expectation of the kind . Such relief , however , as it was in Elizabeth power to afford , by the practice of what might be called economy in Elizabeth own private expences , Elizabeth frequently sent them . It had always been evident to Elizabeth that such an income as them , under the direction of two persons so extravagant in them wants , and heedless of the future , must be very insufficient to them support ; and whenever them changed them quarters , either Jane or Elizabeth were sure of being applied to for some little assistance towards discharging them bills . them manner of living , even when the restoration of peace dismissed them to a home , was unsettled in the extreme . them were always moving from place to place in quest of a cheap situation , and always spending more than them ought . George affection for Elizabeth soon sunk into indifference ; Elizabeth lasted a little longer ; and in spite of Elizabeth youth and Elizabeth manners , Elizabeth retained all the claims to reputation which Elizabeth marriage had given Elizabeth . 
 
  Though George could never receive George at Pemberley , yet , for Elizabeth ’s sake , George assisted George further in George profession . Lydia was occasionally a visitor there , when George was gone to enjoy George in London or Bath ; and with the Bingleys they both of them frequently staid so long , that even Charles ’s good humour was overcome , and even Charles ’s proceeded so far as to talk of giving them a hint to be gone . 
 
  Caroline was very deeply mortified by Elizabeth marriage ; but as Caroline thought it advisable to retain the right of visiting at Pemberley , Caroline dropt all Caroline resentment ; was fonder than ever of Georgiana , almost as attentive to George as heretofore , and paid off every arrear of civility to Elizabeth . 
 
  Pemberley was now Georgiana ’s home ; and the attachment of the sisters was exactly what George had hoped to see . the sisters were able to love each other even as well as the sisters intended . Georgiana had the highest opinion in the world of Elizabeth ; though at first Georgiana often listened with an astonishment bordering on alarm at Elizabeth lively , sportive , manner of talking to George . George , Georgiana now saw the object of open pleasantry . Georgiana mind received knowledge which had never before fallen in Georgiana way . By Elizabeth ’s instructions , Georgiana began to comprehend that a woman may take liberties with a woman husband which a brother will not always allow in a sister more than ten years younger than a brother . 
 
  Cathleen was extremely indignant on the marriage of Cathleen nephew ; and as Cathleen gave way to all the genuine frankness of Cathleen character in Cathleen reply to the letter which announced the marriage of Cathleen nephew arrangement , Cathleen sent Cathleen nephew language so very abusive , especially of Elizabeth , that for some time all intercourse was at an end . But at length , by Elizabeth ’s persuasion , Cathleen nephew was prevailed on to overlook the offence , and seek a reconciliation ; and , after a little further resistance on the part of Cathleen nephew aunt , Cathleen resentment gave way , either to Cathleen affection for Cathleen nephew , or Cathleen curiosity to see how Elizabeth conducted Elizabeth ; and Cathleen condescended to wait on them at Pemberley , in spite of that pollution which Pemberley woods had received , not merely from the presence of such a mistress , but the visits of Elizabeth uncle and aunt from the city . 
 
  With the Gardiners , them were always on the most intimate terms . George , as well as Elizabeth , really loved the Gardiners ; and George , as well as Elizabeth were both ever sensible of the warmest gratitude towards the persons who , by bringing Elizabeth into Derbyshire , had been the means of uniting George , as well as Elizabeth . 
